S e e 	 d i s c u s s i o n s , 	 s t a t s , 	 a n d 	 a u t h o r 	 p r o f i l e s 	 f o r 	 t h i s 	 p u b l i c a t i o n 	 a t :
h t t p s : / / w w w . r e s e a r c h g a t e . n e t / p u b l i c a t i o n / 2 9 1 4 2 4 8 0 9
P e r s o n a l 	 A c t i v i t y 	 T r a c k e r s 	 a n d 	 t h e
Q u a n t i f i e d 	 S e l f
A r t i c l e 	 	 i n 	 	 M e d i c a l 	 R e f e r e n c e 	 S e r v i c e s 	 Q u a r t e r l y 	 · 	 J a n u a r y 	 2 0 1 6
D O I : 	 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 0 2 7 6 3 8 6 9 . 2 0 1 6 . 1 1 1 7 3 0 0
C I T A T I O N S R E A D S
2 6 4
1 	 a u t h o r :
M a t t h e w 	 B 	 H o y
M a y o 	 F o u n d a t i o n 	 f o r 	 M e d i c a l 	 E d u c …
1 4 	 P U B L I C A T I O N S 	 	 	 1 0 1 	 C I T A T I O N S 	 	 	
S E E 	 P R O F I L E
A l l 	 i n - t e x t 	 r e f e r e n c e s 	 u n d e r l i n e d 	 i n 	 b l u e 	 a r e 	 l i n k e d 	 t o 	 p u b l i c a t i o n s 	 o n 	 R e s e a r c h G a t e , A v a i l a b l e 	 f r o m : 	 M a t t h e w 	 B 	 H o y
l e t t i n g 	 y o u 	 a c c e s s 	 a n d 	 r e a d 	 t h e m 	 i m m e d i a t e l y . R e t r i e v e d 	 o n : 	 0 5 	 O c t o b e r 	 2 0 1 6
MEDICAL REFERENCE SERVICES QUARTERLY
2016, VOL. 35, NO. 1, 94–100
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02763869.2016.1117300
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Matthew B. Hoy and Tara J. Brigham, Column Editors
Personal Activity Trackers and the Quantified Self
Matthew B. Hoy
Medical Library, Mayo Clinic Health System, Eau Claire, Wisconsin, USA
ABSTRACT KEYWORDS
Activity trackers; FitBit;
Personal activity trackers are an inexpensive and easy way for
fitness trackers; life logging;
people to record their physical activity and simple biometric
quantified self
data. As these devices have increased in availability and
sophistication, their use in daily life and in medicine has grown.
This column will briefly explore what these devices are, what
types of data they can track, and how that data can be used. It
will also discuss potential problems with trackers and how
librarians can help patients and physicians manage and protect
activity data. A brief list of currently available activity trackers is
also included.
Introduction
Ever since “physical fitness” became something to be concerned about,
people have looked for ways to quantify the amount of physical activity
they perform. Runners track distances and times, weight lifters count
sets and pounds lifted, and swimmers count laps; everybody is counting
something. Until relatively recently, much of this counting was done
manually or with simple tools like a pedometer. Recent advances in
technology have created a new class of wearable devices commonly
referred to as personal activity trackers or fitness trackers. These devices
allow users to automatically track information about their physical
activity,fromstepstakentoverticaldistancetravelled,andfromheartrate
to sleep cycles. These devices also make it easy for users to create detailed
records of their physical activity. These records can be valuable tools in
motivating users to exercise more, and may also be useful in the practice
of medicine. This column will briefly explore what personal activity track-
ers are and what implications they may have for the practice of medicine.
It will also discuss some of the problems inherent to these devices and
ways that librarians can help users and health care professionals manage
these devices. A brief list of currently available activity trackers is also
included.
CONTACT Matthew B. Hoy hoy.matt@mayo.edu Medical Library, Mayo Clinic Health System–Eau Claire,
1221 Whipple Street, Eau Claire, WI 54701, USA.
Comments and suggestions should be sent to the Column Editors: Matthew B. Hoy (hoy.matt@mayo.edu) and Tara J.
Brigham (Brigham.Tara@mayo.edu).
Published with license by Taylor & Francis. © Matthew B. Hoy
MEDICAL REFERENCE SERVICES QUARTERLY 95
What Are Personal Activity Trackers?
Like many other new technologies, there are no clear rules defining what
makes a device an activity tracker. There are many devices on the market,
and every manufacturer is trying to differentiate their product with unique
features. For purposes of clarity, this column defines a personal activity
tracker as an electronic device with the following features:
. is designed to be worn on the user’s body;
. uses accelerometers, altimeters, or other sensors to track the wearer’s
movements and/or biometric data; and
. uploads activity data to an online application that shows trends over
time.
Therearemanycurrentlyavailabledevicesthatfittheserequirements,from
simple step trackers to smart fitness watches that monitor the wearer’s heart
beat and track their movements via GPS. Fitness trackers come in all shapes
andsizesfromwristbandstopendantsandfromtowatchestosmallclipsthat
attachtotheuser’sshoe.Datauploadisusuallyhandledbyadockingstation
attached to an Internet-enabled computer or via Bluetooth to a smartphone.
Usersaccesstheirdataviaawebsite,whichusuallyfeaturestoolsforgoal-set-
ting,long-termtracking,andsocialmediafunctionssuchassharingstatistics
and encouraging or competing with other users.
Manyexistingdietandfitnessappsallowuserstointegrateactivitytracker
data into their products. MyFitnessPal <http://www.myfitnesspal.com>, a
popular online dieting community that helps users to keep a diary of their
food intake and exercise, currently integrates with over a dozen different
activity tracker brands. This integration allows users to automatically pull
their activity data over into the food tracking application. If they eat a
cheese-burger for lunch and run an extra mile to make up for it, the two
applications will share their data to give the user a clearer picture of their
caloric intake and output. Weight loss site LoseIt <http://www.loseit.com>
also allows users to connect many activity trackers to their food diary.
The desire to attach personal numeric data to everyday activities such as
eating and exercising has been dubbed the “quantified self” movement.
Adherents to this philosophy believe that if they can measure an aspect of
their life on a regular basis, they can find a way to improve it. As Wolf put
it,“theallureofthequantifiedselfisaguessthatmanyofourproblemscome
1
from simply lacking the instruments to understand who we are.” Others
describe the movement as one that “encourages people to use computers,
smartphones, various electronic gadgets, and even pen and paper to track
2
and manage one’s sleep patterns, work, exercise, diet, and mood.” Members
ofthe“quantifiedself”movementaresimplyusingactivitytrackersasanother
toolintheirarsenaltoattachharddatatoasmanyofaspectsoftheirlivesas
possible.
96 M. B. HOY
Implications for Medicine
Activity trackers have the potential to be useful in the practice of medicine.
Physicians have been advising patients to be more physically active for dec-
ades. Encouraging patients to track their activity could provide the daily
reminder and motivation needed to make an exercise intervention truly suc-
cessful. Majmudar et al. feel these devices could “close the feed-back loop
3
between a patient’s choices, actions, and overall health.”
Althoughthepotentialfortrackerstobeamotivatingforceisthere,sofar
thereislittleevidence;asmalltrialconductedbyWangetal.foundthat“sim-
ply providing a wearable sensor/device for self-monitoring of PA [physical
4
activity] was insufficient in achieving increases in target PA levels.” It will
likelytakeyearsofexperimentationtofindtherightmixtureofactivitytrack-
ing, positive feedback, and traditional counseling to maximize the positive
effects of activity tracking.
Inadditiontobeingamotivatorforexercise,physicianscouldaskpatients
towearanactivitytrackerasadiagnostictool.AsLyonsetal.noted,“consis-
tent,objectivemeasuresprovidedbythesemonitorscouldallowcliniciansto
identify at-risk individuals for secondary prevention and rehabilitation
5
interventions.” At present, there do not appear to be any studies of activity
trackers used in this way.
Another key application for activity trackers in medicine is as a low-cost
and widely available method of sleep monitoring. Sleep studies conducted
inatraditionalsetting are expensiveanddisruptivetothe patient’sdaily life.
Activity monitors can sense when a patient is moving and use that data as
proxy for whether they are asleep or awake. Marino et al. found that wrist
wornactivitytrackerswere86%accurateatmeasuringpatientssleeporwake-
fulness; they consider “wrist actigraphy [a wrist worn activity monitor] a
6
reasonable technique for measuring sleep.” The long-term tracking abilities
of these devices “make them an attractive alternative to standard actigraphy
7
in monitoring daily sleep–wake rhythms over several days.” Multiday stays
in a traditional sleep laboratory are expensive and disruptive to the patient’s
dailylife.Ifanactivitytrackercanapproximatetheresultsofasleeplab,there
is potential for huge savings.
Although there is definitely potential for activity trackers to positively
impactsleepmedicine,theyarenotasilverbullet.VandenBulckurgedcau-
tionagainstanoverrelianceondatafromthesedevices,notingthatthereare
8
likely to be many false positives and self-diagnosing patients.
Activity tracking and data use in medicine is still in its infancy. Chung
et al. found that only around one-third of activity tracker users currently
share that data with their health care providers, and that “providers rarely
9
engage with this data, which frustrates many of thoseself-trackers.” There
are several reasons for this lack of provider engagement: sheer volume of
MEDICAL REFERENCE SERVICES QUARTERLY 97
data, lack of time both in the appointment and outside it to analyze
activity data, and lack of a useable export mechanism from most tracking
websites. Until these issues are resolved, it is unlikely activity trackers will
be broadly used in general practice.
Potential Problems
Althoughactivitytrackersshowpromiseinmotivatingusersandempowering
them to participate in their health care, these devices are not without issues.
Lee and Finkelstein noted one of the largest causes for concern: with the
exception of one device (BodyMedia FIT), activity trackers are not regulated
bytheFoodandDrugAdministrationasmedicaldevices,andtheirmanufac-
10
turerscanmakeclaimsof“questionableorunverifiedqualitiesorbenefits.”
Devicemanufacturersarealsonotrequiredtoprovidedataabouttheaccuracy
and reliability of the data produced by these devices. Consumers assume the
devices are 100% accurate, even though they can drastically over- or under-
estimate energy expenditure, especially for activities other than walking.
Stackpooletal.foundthat“errorsinmeasuringEE[energyexpenditure]were,
in general, unacceptably large and became larger with non-standard ambu-
11
lation.” Users hoping for an easy way to track calories burned are likely
to be disappointed with their results, especially if they engage in complex
activities with many different movements.
There are also ethical and privacy issues surrounding activity data. Users
may not be aware of all the data their device is gathering. In the case of
GPS-enableddevices,activitylogswillprovideadailylogoftheuser’smove-
ments. If these data are stored on a website, as most are, there are very real
risks for the user if that website is compromised. Users could find their
devicesimplicatingthemincrimesorplacingthematriskifmaliciousparties
knowtheirdailyhabitsviatrackingdata.Theseideasmaysoundfar-fetched,
but so did cars that report on driver behavior in accidents, and that
12
technology is now widely used.
Anotherproblemwiththesedevicesistheirpotentialtobeusedasawayto
force people to be active. Employers and insurance companies have a vested
interestinseeingemployeesbecomemoreactiveandhealthier,thuslowering
health care costs. Many companies have started employee wellness programs
13
andareincentivizingactivitytracking. Whileimprovingemployeehealthis
a noble if not entirely altruistic goal, it is not a great leap from incentivizing
positivebehaviorstopunishingunwantedbehaviors.Theethicalimplications
of forcing someone to wear a device that reports on their activities are
troubling. However, there are ways around any system, as a group of British
school children discovered while participating in an exercise study. Several
participants attached their tracking devices to their pet’s collars and racked
14
up impressive step totals without getting off the couch.
98 M. B. HOY
How Librarians Can Help
There are several ways librarians can help physicians and patients realize the
benefitsoffitnesstrackersandthe“quantifiedself”movement.Thefirstisto
simply be familiar with these devices; know what they are capable of, what
types of data they can capture, and where they store that data. Librarians
should also be able to temper expectations and explain the limitations
inherent in these devices. Physicians and patients may be convinced that an
activitytrackerwillworkasadvertised,butasO’Brienetal.noted,“manufac-
turersofactivitytrackersprovidelittleinformationabouttheirreliabilityand
15
validity.” Librarians can also act as a voice of caution for protecting the
privacy ofuserswho decidetosharetheir activitydatawiththeir healthcare
providers.
Another way for librarians to help is to assist with data export, manage-
ment, and visualization. This can be a problematic area for many users
because most devices do not offer a simple export tool and only allow
9
social media sharing or API access to data. Trackers with a sufficiently
active user community will often have well-developed third-party tools
for exporting data, but most users are not sophisticated enough to make
use of those files. Librarians should be prepared to teach users to access
activity data and format it in a way that can be shared meaningfully with
their health care provider.
Lastly, librarians can advocate for transparency and standardization in
how personal activity data is gathered, managed, and used. As profes-
sionals who have traditionally provided access to information while main-
taining user privacy, librarians are uniquely equipped to help health care
professionals manage the coming barrage of patient activity data.
Currently Available Trackers
At the time of this writing, these were some of the most popular personal
activity trackers:
. FitBit<http://www.fitbit.com>:Multipletrackersavailablewithavarietyof
features, from simple step counting to continuous heart rate monitoring.
High-end models integrate with user’s smartphone.
. Nike Fuelband <http://www.nike.com/us/en_us/c/nikeplus/nikefuel>:
Wristband tracker pairs with smartphone. App has gamification features
to encourage competition among users.
. Garmin Vivo <http://sites.garmin.com/en-US/vivo/>: Multiple trackers,
some with sports-specific apps and phone integration.
. Jawbone <http://www.jawbone.com>: Multiple trackers that can track
activity,sleep,andheartrate.High-endmodelsincludetouchlesspaymentsys-
tem toreplacecredit cards.
MEDICAL REFERENCE SERVICES QUARTERLY 99
. Xiamo Mi Band <http://www.mi.com/sg/miband>: Low-cost tracker that
has many features including phone integration and sleep tracking.
Conclusion
Personalactivitytrackersarealreadybeingusedbymillionsofpeople.There
is a growing movement toward quantifying and storing data about everyday
personalactivitiessuchasexerciseanddiet,andthesetrackersplayakeyrole
in gathering that data quickly and easily. At present there are no clear stan-
dards foraccuracyandreliability ofthedatabeinggatheredorhow personal
activity data are shared or managed. Librarians should be familiar with
activitytrackerssotheycanhelpphysiciansandpatientsmanageactivitydata
while protecting the patient’s privacy.
Notes on Contributor
Matthew B. Hoy, MLIS (hoy.matt@mayo.edu) is Supervisor of the Medical Library, Mayo
Clinic Health System – Eau Claire, 1221 Whipple Street, Eau Claire, WI 54701.
References
1. Wolf,Gary.“TheData-DrivenLife.”NewYorkTimesMagazine.May2,2010.http://www.
nytimes.com/2010/05/02/magazine/02self-measurement-t.html.
2. Kim,Jeongeun.“AnalysisofHealthConsumers’BehaviorUsingSelf-TrackerforActivity,
Sleep, and Diet.” Telemedicine Journal and E-Health 20, no. 6 (June 2014): 552–558.
doi:10.1089/tmj.2013.0282.
3. Majmudar, Maulik, Lina Avancini Colucci, and Adam Landman. “The Quantified
Patient of the Future: Opportunities and Challenges.” Healthcare 3, no. 3 (September
2015): 153–156. doi:10.1016/j.hjdsi.2015.02.001.
4. Wang,Julie,LisaCadmus-Bertram,LokiNatarajan.“WearableSensor/Device(FitbitOne)
andSMSText-MessagingPromptstoIncreasePhysicalActivityinOverweightandObese
Adults:ARandomizedControlledTrial.”TelemedicineJournalandE-Health:TheOfficial
Journal of the American Telemedicine Association 21, no. 10 (October 2015): 782–792.
doi:10.1089/tmj.2014.0176.
5. Lyons, Elizabeth, Zakkoyya Lewis, Brian Mayrsohn, and Jennifer Rowland. “Behavior
Change Techniques Implemented in Electronic Lifestyle Activity Monitors: A Systematic
Content Analysis.” Journal of Medical Internet Research 16, no. 8 (August 2014): e192.
doi:10.2196/jmir.3469.
6. Marino,Miguel,YiLi,MichaelRueschman,etal. “MeasuringSleep:Accuracy,Sensitivity,
and Specificity of Wrist Actigraphy Compared to Polysomnography.” Sleep 36, no. 11
(November 2013): 1747–1755. doi:10.5665/sleep.3142.
7. de Zambotti, Massimiliano, Stephanie Claudatos, Sarah Inkelis, Ian Colrain, and Fiona
Baker. “Evaluation of a Consumer Fitness-Tracking Device to Assess Sleep in Adults.”
Chronobiology International 32, no. 7 (August 2015): 1024–1028. doi:10.3109/07420528.
2015.1054395.
8. Van den Bulck, Jan. “Sleep Apps and the Quantified Self: Blessing or Curse?” Journal of
Sleep Research 24, no. 2 (April 2015): 121–123. doi:10.1111/jsr.12270.
100 M. B. HOY
9. Chung, Chia-Fang, Jonathan Cook, Elizabeth Bales, Jasmine Zia, and Sean Munson.
“More Than Telemonitoring: Health Provider Use and Nonuse of Life-Log Data in
IrritableBowelSyndromeandWeightManagement.”JournalofMedicalInternetResearch
17, no. 8 (August 2015): e203. doi:10.2196/jmir.4364.
10. Lee,Jeon,andJosephFinkelstein.“ActivityTrackers:ACriticalReview.”StudiesinHealth
Technology and Informatics 205 (2014): 558–562. doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-432-9-558.
11. Stackpool, Caitlin, John Porcari, Richard Mikat, Cordial Gillette, and Carl Foster. “The
Accuracy of Various Activity Trackers in Estimating Steps Taken and Energy Expendi-
ture.” Journal of Fitness Research 3, no. 3 (December 2014): 32–48.
12. Scanlon, John, Kristofer Kusano, and Hampton Gabler. “Analysis of Driver Evasive
Maneuvering Prior to Intersection Crashes Using Event Data Recorders.” Traffic Injury
Prevention 16, no. 2 Suppl. (October 2015): S182–189. doi:10.1080/15389588.2015.
1066500.
13. Norman,Gregory,KevinHeltemes,DebiHeck,andMaryJaneOsmick.“EmployeeUseof
a Wireless Physical Activity Tracker Within Two Incentive Designs at One Company.”
Population Health Management (June 18, 2015). doi:10.1089/pop.2015.0030.
14. “Sly Children Fool Exercise Study.” BBC. July 10, 2009, sec. London. http://news.bbc.co.
uk/2/hi/uk_news/england/london/8143364.stm.
15. O’Brien, Tara, Meredith Troutman-Jordan, Donna Hathaway, Shannon Armstrong, and
Michael Moore. “Acceptability of Wristband Activity Trackers Among Community
Dwelling Older Adults.” Geriatric Nursing 36, no. 2 Suppl. (April 2015): S21–25.
doi:10.1016/j.gerinurse.2015.02.019.
