EDITORIAL
Caban JJ, et al. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2015;22:260–262. doi:10.1093/jamia/ocv006, Editorial
RECEIVED 13 December 2014
Visual analytics in healthcare – opportunities
ACCEPTED 10 January 2015
and research challenges
1 2
Jesus J Caban , David Gotz
....................................................................................................................................................
Key words: visual analytics; data visualization; informatics; BI dashboards; big data
As medical organizations modernize their operations, they are Information overload is the problem that arises when indi-
increasingly adopting electronic health records (EHRs) and de- viduals try to analyze a number of variables that surpass the
6
ploying new health information technology systems that create, limits of human cognition. Information overload often leads to
gather, and manage their information. As a result, the amount users ignoring, overlooking, or misinterpreting crucial informa-
of data available to clinicians, administrators, and researchers tion. The information overload problem is widespread in the
in the healthcare system continues to grow at an unprece- healthcare domain and can result in incorrect interpretations of
1
dented rate. However, despite the substantial evidence show- data, wrong diagnoses, and missed warning signs of impend-
ing the benefits of EHR adoption, e-prescriptions, and other ing changes to patient conditions. The multi-modal and hetero-
components of health information exchanges, healthcare pro- geneous properties of EHR data together with the frequency of
viders often report only modest improvements in their ability to redundant, irrelevant, and subjective measures pose significant
make better decisions by using more comprehensive clinical challenges to users trying to synthesize the information and ob-
2,3
information. tain actionable insights.
The large volume of clinical data now being captured for Yet despite these challenges, the promise of big data in
1
each patient poses many challenges to (a) clinicians trying to healthcare remains. There is a critical need to support re-
combine data from different disparate systems and make search and pilot projects to study effective ways of using visual
sense of the patient’s condition within the context of the pa- analytics to support the analysis of large amounts of medical
tient’s medical history, (b) administrators trying to make deci- data. Currently new interactive interfaces are being developed
sions grounded in data, (c) researchers trying to understand to unlock the value of large-scale clinical databases for a wide
differences in population outcomes, and (d) patients trying to variety of different tasks. For instance, visual analytics could
make use of their own medical data. In fact, despite the many help provide clinicians with more effective ways to combine the
hopes that access to more information would lead to more in- longitudinal clinical data with the patient-generated health data
formed decisions, access to comprehensive and large-scale to better understand patient progression. Patients could be
clinical data resources has instead made some analytical pro- supported in understanding personalized wellness plans and
4
cesses even more difficult. comparing their health measurements against similar patients.
Visual analytics is an emerging discipline that has shown Researchers could use visual analytics tools to help perform
significant promise in addressing many of these information population-based analysis and obtain insights from large
overload challenges. Visual analytics is the science of analyti- amounts of clinical data. Hospital administrators could use vi-
cal reasoning facilitated by advanced interactive visual inter- sual analytics to better understand the productivity of an orga-
5
faces. In order to facilitate reasoning over, and interpretation nization, gaps in care, outcomes measurements, and patient
of, complex data, visual analytics techniques combine con- satisfaction. Visual analytics systems—by combining advanced
cepts from data mining, machine learning, human computing interactive visualization methods with statistical inference and
interaction, and human cognition. As the volume of health- correlation models—have the potential to support intuitive
related data continues to grow at unprecedented rates analysis for all of these user populations while masking the un-
and new information systems are deployed to those already derlying complexity of the data.
overrun with too much data, there is a need for exploring how This special focus issue of JAMIA is dedicated to new
visual analytics methods can be used to avoid information research, applications, case studies, and approaches that use
overload. visual analytics to support the analysis of complex clinical data.
Correspondence to: Dr Jesus J. Caban, National Intrepid Center of Excellence (NICoE), Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, 8901 Wisconsin Avenue,
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA; jesus.j.caban.civ@mail.mil, Tel: 301-319-3759
C
VThe Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
For numbered affiliations see end of article.
260
EDITORIAL
Caban JJ, et al. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2015;22:260–262. doi:10.1093/jamia/ocv006, Editorial
The issue provides a broad picture of active work in this area, believe that visual analytics techniques will become essential
including four research and applications papers, one review elements in the future of health informatics. As the articles in
paper, two brief communications, and one case report. this issue demonstrate, these methods promise to allow users
7
First, West et al. present a systematic review of innovative of all sorts—clinicians, researchers, administrators, patients,
visual analytics approaches that have been proposed to illus- and more—to derive actionable, meaningful insights form the
trate EHR data. The review paper groups over 800 articles in vast and complex data resources that the modern health sys-
different categories and is a great resource for readers who are tem is now creating. Yet this issue also indirectly highlights
interested in understanding what has been done in applying vi- some of the areas of informatics that need more attention.
sual analytics in healthcare settings. These include the visual exploration of unstructured data (e.g.,
In the first of four research and application papers, Klimov text), the challenge of clinical or operational adoption, and the
8
et al. present a data-driven temporal data mining system with lack of standardized methods for evaluation, validation, and
an interactive visual analytics interface to support the analysis measurement of efficacy of visual analytics tools. These are all
and exploration of renal-damage risk factors in type II diabetes critical areas for future work.
patients. Second, Huang et al. present a system to visually ana-
lyze the polymorbidity associated with chronic kidney disease.
The study uses a large-scale database with over 14 000 pa- REFERENCES
tients and a Sankey-style visualization tool to help clinicians
1. Murdoch T., Detsky A. The inevitable application of big
predict the outcome of complex disease based on comorbid-
data to health care. JAMA. 2013; 309(13):1351–1352.
9 10
ities the patients have developed. Third, Hirsch et al. present
2. Lau F., Price M., Boyd J., et al. Impact of electronic medical
a system called HARVEST, an interactive temporal visualization
record on physician practice in office settings: a systematic
for longitudinal patient record. The system implements a pa-
review. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2012;12(1):10–20.
tient record summarizer by extracting content from patient
3. Heisey-Grove D., Danehy L., Consolazio M, et al. A national
notes, aggregating and presenting information from multiple
study of challenges to electronic health record adoption
care settings, and supporting clinicians by providing a flexible
and meaningful use. Medical Care. 2014;52(2):144–148.
tool for reviewing patients’ information. Finally, Soulakis
4. Amarasingham R., Patzer R., Huesch M., et al.
11
et al. discuss practical methods for employing network analy-
Implementing electronic health care predictive analytics:
sis to visualize and describe multidisciplinary, collaborative
considerations and challenges. Health Affairs. 2014;33(7):
care for hospitalized heart failure patients. The authors used
1148–1154.
data for over 500 patients and describe the provider’s collabo-
5. Thomas J., Cook K. eds. Illuminating the path: the research
ration network as a subset of collaborations within a complex
and development agenda for visual analytics. IEEE Comput
graph with 1504 nodes and 83 998 edges.
Soc Press. 2005.
12
In a comprehensive case study, Warner et al. present a
6. Halford G., Baker R., McCredden, et al. How many vari-
network visualization-based system to explore, analyze, and
ables can humans process? Psychol Sci. 2005;16(1):
display the phenotypic patterns that may have remained occult
70–76.
or hidden in basic statistical and pairwise correlation analysis. 7. West V., et al. Innovative information visualization of elec-
The system allows clinicians and researchers to quickly tronic health record data: a systematic review. JAMIA.
generate hypotheses and gain deeper understanding of 2015;22(2):330–339.
subpopulations. 8. Klimov D., et al. Exploration of patterns predicting renal
Finally, two brief communications describe early results
damage in diabetes type II patients using a visual temporal
13
from a pair of visual analysis systems. First, Basole et al. pre-
analysis laboratory. JAMIA. 2015;22(2):275–289.
sent an interactive system that uses visual analytics techniques
9. Li Y.-C., et al. A novel tool to visualize chronic kidney dis-
to explore clinical data from 5784 pediatric asthma emergency
ease associated polymorbidity: a 13-year cohort study in
department patients. The system makes cohort identification
Taiwan. JAMIA. 2015;22(2):290–298.
more efficient and possibly even more accurate that regular
10. Hirsch J., et al. HARVEST, a longitudinal patient record sum-
14
approaches. Second, Ratwani et al. present a dashboard-
marizer. JAMIA. 2015;22(2):263–274.
based system that employs visualization techniques to more
11. Soulakis N., et al. Visualizing collaborative electronic health
effectively explore patient safety event reports, find patterns,
record usage for hospitalized heart failure patients. JAMIA.
and analyze the correlation between different hospital
2015;22(2):299–311.
organizations.
12. Warner J. Seeing the forest through the trees: uncovering
This special issue provides readers with a sample of the va-
phenomic complexity through interactive network visualiza-
riety of work being performed around the world on the topic of
tion. JAMIA. 2015;22(2):324–329.
visual analytics in healthcare. Researchers in this discipline are
13. Basole R. Understanding variations in pediatric asthma care
exploring a range of topics and a growing, vibrant research
processes in the emergency department using visual ana-
15
community has emerged. Many challenges remain, but we
lytics. JAMIA. 2015;22(2):318–323.
261
EDITORIAL
Caban JJ, et al. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2015;22:260–262. doi:10.1093/jamia/ocv006, Editorial
*14. Ratwani R., et al. Connecting the dots: leveraging visual 15. “Visual Analytics in Healthcare.” http://visualanalytic
analytics to make sense of patient safety event reports. shealthcare.org/. Accessed December 9 2014.
JAMIA. 2015;22(2):312–317.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
....................................................................................................................................................
1
National Intrepid Center of Excellence (NICoE), Bethesda, MD,
USA
2
Carolina Health Informatics Program and the School of
Information and Library Science, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA
262
