 
“Everybody Knows What You’re Doing”: A Critical 
Design Approach to Personal Informatics 
1 2,1 1 1 2,1
Vera Khovanskaya , Eric P.S. Baumer , Dan Cosley , Stephen Voida , Geri Gay 
1 2
Department of Information Science Department of Communication 
Cornell University Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY 14850 USA Ithaca, NY 14850 USA 
{vdk9, ericpsb, drc44, svoida, gkg1}@cornell.edu 
 
This conventional approach to personal informatics design 
ABSTRACT 
is facilitated by data-mining infrastructures through which 
We present an alternative approach to the design of 
data about measurable behaviors are gathered, interpreted, 
personal informatics systems: instead of motivating people 
and reflected back to users. These infrastructures process 
to examine their own behaviors, this approach promotes 
vast amounts of personal data but often go unnoticed. Just 
awareness of and reflection on the infrastructures behind 
as functioning infrastructure is embedded and transparent in 
personal informatics and the modes of engagement that they 
regular use [24], the values of self-optimization through 
promote. Specifically, this paper presents an interface that 
quantification built into these infrastructures similarly 
displays personal web browsing data. The interface aims to 
disappear into the background. 
reveal underlying infrastructure using several methods: 
drawing attention to the scope of mined data by displaying 
Using data for self-betterment, however, represents but one 
deliberately selected sensitive data, using purposeful 
possible approach to designing personal informatics. 
malfunction as a way to encourage reverse engineering, and 
Focusing on self-betterment may affirm and reinforce 
challenging normative expectations around data mining by 
mainstream or socially predominant values, such as 
displaying information in unconventional ways. Qualitative 
efficiency and optimization, at the expense of others. These 
results from a two-week deployment show that these 
systems typically present charts and graphs based on 
strategies can raise people’s awareness about data mining, 
numerical information, and insights based on “the 
promote efficacy and control over personal data, and inspire 
quantified self” are only one kind of insight people might 
reflection on the goals and assumptions embedded in 
seek [16]. Uncritical use of data-mining infrastructures may 
infrastructures for personal data analytics. 
reinforce growing trends toward ubiquitous surveillance. 
Relatively few personal informatics systems encourage 
Author Keywords 
people to reflect on or to challenge the values embedded 
Personal informatics; critical design; design strategies 
within them or the larger context of data mining. A number 
ACM Classification Keywords 
of design approaches, such as value-sensitive design [11], 
H.5.m. [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., 
reflective design [22], and critical design [8], have been 
HCI)]: Miscellaneous. 
developed specifically to identify ways that social values 
are embedded in system design and to encourage 
INTRODUCTION 
consideration of alternative relationships between these 
Users of modern technology live in an environment filled 
systems and their users. 
with logging technologies that gather information about 
them, both with and without their knowledge. Personal 
This paper applies critical design to personal informatics, 
informatics systems invite users to reflect on and use these 
with the goal of revealing infrastructure and engaging the 
data, notionally to understand themselves better. The 
users of these systems in a dialogue about the values 
conventional approach driving personal informatics systems 
embedded in data-mining systems. We present a set of 
in the field has been self-betterment through self-
strategies for designing personal informatics systems that 
knowledge: the fruits of data mining should be presented to 
draw attention to the scope and limitations of data-gathering 
users to promote personal optimization and self-
and data-mining infrastructures. These strategies lead to the 
improvement in various aspects of their lives [16]. 
design of systems that promote an alternative to the “know 
thyself” rhetoric by drawing users’ attention to other 
 
relationships with personal data. We demonstrate these 
© ACM, 2013. This is the author's version of the work. It is posted here 
strategies in an interface for collecting and reflecting web 
by permission of ACM for your personal use. Not for redistribution. 
browsing data using text-based personal informatics 
 
The definitive version was published in Proceedings of the SIGCHI visualizations embedded within the browser. To evaluate 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13), Paris, 
the interface and strategies, we conducted a qualitative field 
France, April 27–May 2, pp. 3403–3412. 
study in which participants used our interface for two 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2470654.2466467 
weeks and participated in interviews about their 
experiences. Data from these interviews demonstrate a 
 
 
number of ways that critical designs can promote reflection dimensions of infrastructure that should be examined, and 
on and an increased critical awareness of the implications describes the feeling of “embedded strangeness” when 
and limitations of data-mining infrastructures. invisible processes are brought to light [24].  
RELATED WORK Several design initiatives have sought both to make 
Personal Informatics and Self-Knowledge 
infrastructure visible and to support alternative relationships 
Past research in personal informatics has shed light on the 
between users and the technologies that make use of such 
ways that users interact with and interpret their data. Most 
infrastructure. In critical design, Dunne and Raby have been 
of this research has been carried out with the understanding 
proponents of “developing alternative and often gently 
that data-driven self-reflection can be used to help people 
provocative artifacts which set out to engage people 
become more aware of their own behavior [3] and change 
through humor, insight, surprise and wonder” by adopting 
their behavior for the better [9]. These values have shaped 
alternative values that are not typically designed for in 
research about the questions that individuals might ask of 
mainstream design [8]. In their Placebo project, eight 
their data and uses for personal informatics interfaces [17]. 
prototype objects were created with the goal of engaging 
users with electromagnetism through electromagnetic 
The justification for personal informatics systems often 
interference and malfunction. For example, among the 
rests on arguments about the limitations of human self 
objects was a table that “reminds you that electronic objects 
knowledge: unassisted, knowing oneself is difficult because 
extend beyond their visible limits” by showing twenty-five 
we often have incomplete data and limited ability to 
compasses on its surface that twitch and spin when 
monitor ourselves [27]. Personal informatics augment a 
electronics are placed near them. They were designed to act 
person’s self-knowledge by breaking down human barriers 
on users’ existing suspicions and elicit stories about the 
to personal data management [17]. In this reading, as the 
secret life of electronic objects as seen by their users [8]. 
infrastructures supporting ubiquitous computing continue to 
Similarly, Redström’s Chatterbox system explores various 
evolve, the promise of the field of personal informatics also 
visualization techniques for reflecting on information 
grows, as increasingly rich information sources can support 
technology use in the workplace [19]. 
new levels of self-understanding and self-optimization. 
Data visualization techniques have also been used to draw 
In addition to the trend of gathering and analyzing more 
attention to power infrastructures. For instance, the Oil 
data in personal informatics interfaces, it is also becoming 
Standard modifies and augments web browsing with the 
more common to consolidate and integrate data from a 
tactic of revealing power and hegemony by translating the 
variety of sources. This tactic supports users’ simultaneous 
prices of consumer goods into units of oil and embedding 
exploration of multiple facets of their lives through their 
those translations into the browser window, itself [7, 18]. In 
data [15]. As an example, popular commercial products 
personal informatics systems, visualizations are aimed at 
such as Mint and Nike+ consolidate and display 
highlighting elements of users’ data, but the visualizations 
information from multiple data sources to help people find 
can also be turned on the data-mining infrastructures, 
patterns in their financial and exercise data [17]. 
themselves, to draw attention to their size and scope. For 
It is important, however, to recognize the role that the 
example, the Mozilla browser extension Collusion shows 
underlying value of self-optimization through self-
the extent to which websites cooperate to track people’s 
knowledge has had in shaping the field of personal 
behavior by visualizing cookies and the relationships 
informatics. It has influenced the goals and questions of 
among the websites that issue them [5]. By displaying the 
personal informatics researchers and embedded itself into 
resulting network of data-mining monetization campaigns, 
the nature of data-mining infrastructure. And though there 
it encourages reflection on these infrastructures. 
has been interest in applying personal informatics interfaces 
In examining the infrastructure of personal informatics and 
to other ends, such as reminiscing [19] and personal 
the values and value systems embedded therein, we 
information management [13], there have been few studies 
approach personal informatics as an arena for subjective 
of using personal informatics to raise awareness of the data-
engagement. Proponents of a subjectivist approach to 
mining infrastructures, themselves. 
personal informatics argue for balancing the presentation of 
Information Infrastructure and Critical Design 
objective data signals with the human ability to make sense 
These infrastructures play a major role in how, what, and 
of this information and interpret it [14]. In particular, we 
why people might use personal informatics. In her work on 
focus on encouraging people to playfully engage with their 
the ethnography of infrastructure, Star notes that 
personal data through the idea of “making strange” [1], 
infrastructure is, by default, “invisible, buried in semi-
presenting personal informatics data in unusual ways to 
private settings and squirreled away in inaccessible 
stimulate the values of “curiosity, play, exploration, and 
technical code” [24]. Embedded in those systems, though, 
reflection” called for by ludic design approaches [12]. 
lie the socio-technical standards, aesthetics, and values of 
In promoting multiplicity of engagement in personal 
the people who build and use them. Star argues for the 
informatics interfaces, our goal is not to suggest that 
ethnographic examination of infrastructure, offers several 
designing personal informatics for self-optimization 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshot of the interface. 
through self knowledge is wrong; rather, it is one among a Creating Provocative Facts 
We then examined the Chrome API to see what data it 
range of possibilities that can be explored. We demonstrate 
made available and how those data might be used. These 
how raising awareness of information infrastructures is a 
available data included the URL of pages visited and the 
design motivation that can challenge and complement 
associated time stamps, with additional events for opening 
personal informatics interfaces [20]. 
tabs and accessing bookmarks. This API became source 
DESIGN PROCESS AND STRATEGIES 
material and inspiration for an extensive list of “provocative 
Our design goals were to raise awareness of the data-
facts,” specific presentations of personal information that 
mining process, to highlight its scope and limitations, and 
we might be able to implement and deploy. We focused on 
to expose predominant values embedded in personal 
text-based presentations rather than the graphs and charts 
informatics interfaces and data-mining infrastructures. Our 
common in conventional personal informatics interfaces, 
design process led to the articulation of three strategies, 
both to facilitate prototyping and to create a simple 
each of which addressed one of these goals. 
implementation that designers with other datasets could 
Choosing a Data Source and Platform 
easily emulate.  
We began by exploring the kinds of personal data that 
We shared this list with colleagues, noting which designs 
would be feasible to mine and would provide grist for 
provoked the strongest responses as well as the nature of 
provoking reflection. After considering potentially personal 
those responses. The most promising designs served as 
data sources such as health or biometrics information, we 
templates for the final set of facts that the system presented 
settled on web browsing as a data source. Web browsing 
about the users’ web browsing. Opening the extension 
activities can be highly personal, meaning that analyzing a 
presents the user with a randomly selected subset of these 
user’s browsing data both aligns with the traditional focus 
facts, as shown in Figure 1. 
of personal informatics (i.e., “know thyself”) and has 
significant provocative potential. Further, it is a kind of data 
During the implementation process, we also organized the 
that, while passively collected, is easily viewable through 
facts into rough conceptual groups based on the nature of 
browsers’ history listings, and it is a kind of data with 
the provocation that they inspired. We iteratively combined, 
known risks caused by its collection, evidenced by mass-
divided, and recombined these groups, along with their 
media coverage of problems caused by the release of search 
connections and resonances with Star's dimensions and 
histories and online identity theft. 
properties of infrastructures, until each stood as both 
conceptually coherent and distinct from the others. 
We developed an extension to the Chrome web browser to 
collect browsing data and to present personal informatics 
By examining the facts that ended up in each of these 
visualizations of those data. Not only is Chrome a popular groups, asking what they had in common that made them 
browser [26], but building a Chrome extension is not much 
provocative, and considering what sorts of discussions they 
more difficult or complex than building a web page, and we 
evoked, we articulated a set of strategies for designing 
wanted the techniques we used to be appropriable by other 
personal informatics systems. These strategies serve two 
designers who may not have a background in machine 
roles. First, they provide concrete guidance for designers 
learning or data mining. This approach also allowed us to 
who might wish to apply critical design to the domain of 
store and process the web browsing data on participants’ 
personal informatics. Second, we suggest that these 
machines, without having to download it to a server, 
strategies describe an effective means for promoting critical 
allowing us to respect participants’ privacy. 
reflection about data-mining infrastructures. 
 
 
Design Strategy Infrastructure dimension Motivation 
Make it Creepy: Display the sensitive and Raise implications of data-gathering systems for 
Reach or scope of data infrastructure 
highly personal aspects of gathered data. surveillance and individual privacy. 
Make it Malfunction: Deliberately display Infrastructure becomes visible upon Promote reflection on the limitations of data 
gaps in gathered data breakdown gathering. 
Highlight the role of personal informatics systems 
Make it Strange: Show information in Infrastructure links with conventions of 
in perpetuating dominant social norms in data 
unconventional ways practice 
gathering and presentation. 
Table 1. Three general strategies for designing provocative facts, their relationship to Star’s infrastructures, and their design goals. 
Three Design Strategies 
been open but not how long it has held focus; if a user has 
Our design strategies describe a means for achieving five tabs open for one hour, a naïve reading of the data 
several goals: to raise awareness of the broad scope of 
provided by the API makes it appear that the user has been 
personal data mining, to reveal the limitations of the data-
online for five hours and has spent one hour on each site. 
mining process, and to expose the predominant social 
This aspect of the data led to situations in which the system 
values embedded in personal informatics infrastructure. 
told the user that s/he had been online for longer than 24 
Table 1 presents the relationships between these strategies, 
hours in a single day. In another example, if the proportion 
Star’s perspective on infrastructure, and specific design 
of .edu websites exceeded that of other websites, users were 
goals we hoped would help raise awareness of key aspects 
addressed by the interface as being a “scholar.” In this case, 
of data-mining infrastructures. 
not only do many scholarly activities take place on non-edu 
websites, but simply visiting .edu websites does not a 
Make It Creepy. “Creepy” informatics highlight the scope 
scholar make. 
of personal data mining and the highly personal nature of 
the data being collected. To make our interface creepy, we 
These examples show conclusions that are obviously 
looked for personal data that might be uncomfortable for 
wrong, but that wrongness is the point. By intentionally 
the user to confront. We did not seek data that were 
interpreting the data in incorrect or implausible ways, we 
necessarily uncomfortable in and of themselves, but rather 
engineer breakdowns that make “the normally invisible 
data that, when collected and mined, contrasts with the 
quality of working infrastructure…visible” [24]. Thus, 
commonly perceived and valued anonymity of web users’ 
malfunctioning informatics use satire and incorrectness to 
behavior. For example, the fact “Did you know that we’ve 
draw attention to hidden infrastructures and the 
been recording your activity for 5 days? In that time, we’ve 
assumptions made in the data-mining process. 
seen you online for 200 total hours, and recorded more than 
Make It Strange. Personal informatics collect, analyze, and 
200 sites you’ve visited” calls attention to the scale and 
curate data for a specific purpose, often in the interest of 
continuous nature of web data logging, as well as the 
persuasion or behavior change [17]. That purpose shapes 
extensive infrastructure that exists for gathering and 
the user’s relationship with her or his data. Personal 
manipulating users’ data. The goal is not to force the user to 
informatics rarely highlight the role that these interfaces 
confront uncomfortable or shameful aspects of their data, 
play in affirming mainstream relationships between 
but rather to make visible the effect of being under constant 
individuals and their data. Making strange informatics 
surveillance, contrasting the socially normative values of 
draws attention to the embedded norms of such systems by 
logging and self-tracking with the privacy implications of 
suggesting alternative genres of personal informatics that 
personal informatics infrastructures and interfaces. 
emphasize humor and ludic engagement over behavior 
Make It Malfunction. “All models are wrong” [2], and data 
change and personal optimization, while still using the 
are always incomplete. Our second design strategy involves 
metrics and vocabulary of the existing infrastructure. 
highlighting this incompleteness. In some ways, this 
Making it strange is not a matter of gamification [6] or 
strategy resonates with Chalmers’ notion of “seamful 
making personal informatics “fun.” Rather, it more closely 
design,” an approach that highlights the places where 
resembles making fun of personal informatics. To make it 
ubiquitous computing technology is not perfectly seamless 
strange, we followed a number of approaches. For example, 
and explicitly incorporates such seams meaningfully into 
one fact told the user, “You visited 592 websites this week. 
the design [4]. Similarly, “malfunctioning” informatics 
That’s .5 times the number of webpages on the whole 
highlight gaps in the data and the ways that those gaps can 
internet in 1994!” This historical comparison draws 
lead to an imperfect picture of the self. 
attention to the abundant nature of modern web browsing as 
We looked for stories that seemed plausible based on the 
collected through unique URLs, but presented in a 
data alone, but actually were slight misinterpretations, 
somewhat obtuse and non-judgmental way. A similar fact 
somewhat inaccurate, or completely ridiculous. For 
stated, “In the time you've spent on the web, Apollo 11 
example, the Chrome API reports how long every tab has 
would have gone to the moon and back 1.5 times.” 
 
 
Comparing the user’s web browsing data with other data or or—less often—a tool to contemplate one’s data traces as 
known quantities measured in different units added a they are seen by other online entities. The interview process 
playful dimension, upending social convention and often had a transformative effect. Initially, users often 
normative values by allowing the design to poke fun at the 
described the interface as being an optimization tool. After 
data or, at times, at itself.  being prompted to describe their experiences of the 
interface, they arrived at various critical conclusions about 
Note that the design strategies were not explicitly described 
broader privacy policy disclosure issues, the inherent 
to participants, e.g., no part of the system was labeled or 
limitations of data mining, and the norms and standards 
described as being “creepy.” Rather, the strategies provide 
embedded into personal informatics. Users also recalled 
categorization, for our own design process and provide 
experiences with other personal informatics interfaces 
concepts that may be useful to other interested designers. 
outside the traditional “self-optimization through self-
USER STUDY knowledge” narrative. We organize the results by our three 
To explore the potential value of our strategies, we 
design strategies. 
conducted a user study to evaluate the effectiveness of each 
Make It Creepy. When asked about the scope of the data 
strategy at promoting critical reflection about personal 
that users thought their browser collected about them, many 
informatics and their infrastructures. 
participants “just assumed they logged everything” [P17]. 
Methods 
11 participants expressed awareness of and passiveness 
We tested our interface over the course of two weeks with 
toward ubiquitous online surveillance and were not 
23 participants, recruited using local university department 
surprised about the invasive nature of the creepy 
listserv emails and snowball sampling from those emails. 
informatics because “Google already knows everything 
Participants received a mid-point questionnaire that asked 
about me” [P10]. When prompted to define “everything” in 
them to talk about their experience and general use of the 
more detail, one user described how he imagined that 
system, as well as their specific reactions to the responses 
Google was logging his mouse movements and keystrokes, 
generated by the system (e.g., which facts did you like, 
as per his experience of using Google’s built-in chat 
which did you find confusing, etc.). Participants were asked 
service, which “knew” whether users were idle or typing: 
to complete an exit interview at the conclusion of the study, 
“Chrome knows when you are sleeping, Chrome knows 
featuring more open-ended, interpretive questions and 
when you're awake…” [P3]. 
clarifications of responses in the mid-point questionnaire. 
However, the creepy informatics prompted participants to 
We did an affinity analysis of our exit interview data, 
try to identify which infrastructure recorded the number of 
iteratively grouping and regrouping responses to different 
websites visited and time spent online. One participant 
questions based on thematic similarity. The analysis 
commented on the difference between “Chrome history, 
focused on reactions such as awareness of data-mining 
which is not to be confused with Google history… your 
infrastructure, criticism and rejection of the dominant 
Google search history”—where the participant explained 
personal informatics narrative, and consideration of 
that the latter was “going to Google” while the former was 
alternative narratives and values. We used that analysis to 
only stored locally on their computer [P12]. Participants 
loosely code the interviews and questionnaire responses for 
wondered whether the data gathered in Chrome was still 
recurrent themes, which we organize and present in the 
personally identifiable if they “don't use any Google 
results section below. 
account,” and whether it was associated instead by IP 
Results 
address [P8]. Several participants commented on the 
19 (6 female) of the 23 participants returned the mid-point 
implications of data tracking outside of our interface; one 
questionnaire and agreed to be interviewed. Our 
participant questioned whether Google used any identity 
participants were mostly undergraduate students studying at 
information to affect her browsing experience: 
a large research university in the northeastern United States. 
One thing that kind of bothers me is their 
Two thirds of participants described themselves as studying 
personalization of your search results without them 
in technology-oriented fields. Despite the potential bias 
telling you […] I understand why they narrow down 
from technology-focused students, our participant 
search results, so that people see what they want. But at 
population enabled us to elicit feedback about how people 
the same time, it’s a little strange that we can all Google 
reacted to the design strategies operating on their own data. 
the same thing and get different results…. [P10] 
It also enabled insights about how people who anticipate 
These later reactions demonstrate increased concern about 
working in the technology sector think about the effects of 
specific aspects and implications of the data-mining process 
designing personal informatics systems that collect and 
and underlying infrastructure. This attitude was also echoed 
mediate data of other (often non-technical) individuals. 
by two participants who, after completing the interview, 
Analysis of our interviews revealed a consistent first 
sent the researchers documents and discussions detailing 
impression of the interface. Participants typically saw the 
Google’s and Chrome’s privacy policies in attempts to 
tool as a lighthearted and imperfect tool for introspection 
clarify aspects of data-mining policy. Attempts to 
 
 
disambiguate the structure of personal data traces also led This reaction bounds the traditional personal informatics 
to critiques of the incongruity between the design 
narrative of self-optimization through self-knowledge by 
motivations of the systems that gather personal data and the recognizing that the technologies that gather data could be 
systems that present it back to users. When asked with 
wrong. In particular, both knowing these limitations and 
whom they might share facts from our interface, users having more information outside of the data presented can 
wanted to give them to other people with the intention of help people interpret the results of data mining. Presenting 
raising the same kinds of awareness: misinformation motivates critical discussion about the 
I think [my friend] would just find something like this limitations of data-mining tools and their potential for error, 
very interesting because we have talked about these as well as alternative roles for the user in interpreting these 
same issues before […] Oh well, everybody tracks all informatics interfaces. 
of your information. Everybody knows what you’re 
15 participants also attempted to reverse-engineer the 
doing. [P15] 
erroneous facts to explain how they were computed. This 
Specifically, individuals who identified themselves as reverse engineering is a form of critical thinking where the 
people with technical knowledge thought that the interface 
subject disambiguates a process that would otherwise be 
could be useful for raising awareness about data mining invisible to them. One participant described a reverse-
among non- or less-technical users: engineering process in response to a fact about her 
I would give it to a non-CS [computer science] major Facebook usage: 
friend of mine, because I’d be curious in seeing how The first time I looked at it, it said that the site on 
they’d respond to it… I don’t think they would take the Facebook I’m most likely to visit was my friend 
same kindness to a tool collecting statistics about them. [name]’s Facebook […] I know I’ve been on my own 
[P16] at least twice that day. So, maybe I accidentally left 
that tab open… and it does it by time. [P7] 
We hoped to use the creepy informatics to raise awareness 
of the scope of data mining, yet many participants Some reverse-engineering attempts were very technical, 
expressed a general sense of complacency toward Google’s 
such as the participant who described his usage of the 
ubiquitous data-mining infrastructure. However, interface as “I read the analytics and then thought about 
participants speculated widely about the actual capabilities 
which parts of my HTML headers you were collecting” 
of personal informatics systems and the types of data we [P18]. Such attention to technical detail may be due in part 
collected. They attempted to clarify their understanding of to our technology-heavy participant sample. However, 
the personal data infrastructure, e.g., which entities had participants from non-technical backgrounds also engaged 
access to their information, where that information went, in this reverse-engineering process: 
and the extent of the logging. Finally, users speculated on Unless I’ve discovered a wormhole, I don’t see how I 
how the data-mining process affected their browsing could have spent over 1,000 hours online in five days 
experiences and how it might affect others’ experiences. [...] I’m not techie at all, so I only thought of that when 
I got a weird answer like that. So I realized it was 
Make It Malfunction. In response to informatics built with 
probably calculating all my tabs or taking all my tabs 
unreliable data, participants, understandably, did not agree 
into account or something. [P11] 
with many of the representations generated in response to 
their behavior. In response to the system’s incorrect Such results suggest that designing misinformation can 
identification of their most-visited page on Facebook (by 
encourage reverse-engineering attempts not just for 
counting time spent at a unique URL), one participant “techies,” but also for people who do not describe 
described the discrepancy: themselves as having a technical background. These 
When I’ve been on Facebook, my most-visited site was attempts lead to interrogation of a process that is often 
the checkpoint to confirm it was you if you were using invisible or regarded as being value-neutral by non-
a new computer. And I’ve probably spent more time specialists. 
stalking people than just I have just pressing 
Finally, misinformation prompted several abstract 
‘Remember this computer’ or whatever. [P2] 
discussions about the inherent limitations of data gathering. 
Such reactions not only cast doubt on the rest of the 
One participant criticized the analysis present in the 
interface but also prompted recounting instances of interface and commented that “the same pitfalls of data 
doubting other technologies: 
mining are also true of a lot of statistical manipulation in 
[On] a treadmill, even if you enter your weight and general…. A big joke in the field is when somebody asks 
your age, it's not going to give you your exact heart ‘what do these numbers mean,’ you say, ‘what do you want 
rate, or…the exact number of calories burned, but you them to mean?’” [P6]. 
still get a sense… But the treadmill that I've been using 
Another participant asserted that web-browsing data 
in New York [City], I don’t think it’s me that’s better, 
“couldn’t describe me because it only describes my 
but it seems that I’m doing better on it than I was at 
browsing habits…. It just wouldn’t be perfect because I 
home. [P4] 
 
 
have experiences outside of the web world that would presenting unexpected information, we saw evidence that 
influence my web behavior” [P16]. By drawing attention to 
our strategies may have helped to uncover the expectations 
and calling into question the methods used to present the and standards embedded in the infrastructure. 
data, misinformation undermined the expectation that users 
Similarly, when a participant was asked why the system 
are supposed to confront their data and, as a result, change 
chose to show Google searches in kilowatt-hours, they 
their behavior. Instead, they suggested that the data could 
added, “It’s not the system, this is you!” [P13]. By making 
be gathered in ways that are biased and that the data 
it strange, we created a space where users’ expectations (the 
presents an inherently limited subset of the users’ 
normative mainstream values of the system) fell into 
experiences. 
conflict with the interface, drawing attention to the role of 
Thus, showing users faulty representations of their personal the designer as a mediator of data infrastructure. 
data provoked a variety of critical reactions about the 
Over half of our participants responded to the ludic 
limitations of personal informatics systems. Users 
informatics with similarly playful appropriations. One 
responded with personal narratives around the 
participant proudly described his “extra browser” where he 
misinformational facts and how they came into conflict 
kept several tabs open and stagnant because he wanted to 
with their own perceptions. Users also attempted to reverse 
see how many times he “could make Apollo 11 go to the 
engineer the process of the malfunctioning informatics to 
moon” [P13]. Other participants talked about “training” the 
explain how they came to show the information that they 
interface, and doing certain superficial behaviors like 
did, and in that process demonstrated awareness of data-
closing extra tabs to get what they saw as a more favorable 
mining structures. More broadly, participants reflected on 
result from the interface (i.e., less time spent online) [P7]. 
the effect that misinformation has on their experience of 
One participant admitted to “fantasizing about opening all 
personal informatics and whether misinformation was an 
the .edu sites, so it would tell me I’m a scholar” [P3]. 
inherent and inevitable outcome of data-mining processes, 
Similarly, participants’ playful responses also extended 
themselves. This contentious attitude toward data-driven 
beyond our interface to other systems, such as when a 
persuasion became more central in participants’ experiences 
participant expressed a desire to “log one calorie” into a 
around the third strategy. 
calorie tracker tool that predicted how much she would 
Make It Strange. Several of the facts in our interface 
weigh in the future because “then it’ll tell me […] you’re 
showed data in unexpected ways. Participants referred to going to weigh negative two pounds by Friday!” [P4]. 
the strange informatics as “the random ones” and as the 
One user projected her relationship to the system over time: 
ones that they didn’t expect to be included in the interface. 
I've been on Facebook for 27.83 hours, right? […] 
Specifically, many users reported finding these facts to be 
Well, I kind of don’t care. Probably in another month, 
unexpected because they did not present users’ behavior in 
it telling me about how much time I spend on 
familiar units (such as hours or number of pages visited). 
Facebook is just going to be kind of meaningless to me 
Participants questioned why certain points of data were 
because it’s like, what do those hours mean in any 
chosen and calculated in that way. In response to the fact 
case? But what I do like is the one that’s like you've 
that incorporated comparisons to the size and scope of the 
used, mine says .03 kilowatt-hours… that and the 
internet, one user looked up how many sites existed in 
fraction of the Internet that existed in 1994. That’s kind 
1994, and said in response: 
of interesting because over time it will amount to 
I’m actually surprised. I consider myself kind of an 
something meaningful. [P15] 
Internet power user, and back in 19-something-or-
other… there were like ten thousand pages on the In this case, the participant dismisses the longevity of the 
Internet, and I haven’t even come close to that. [P14] 
persuasive element of personal informatics, instead 
adopting an alternative relationship based not on self-
Instead of reflecting on ways to optimize his web browsing, 
optimization but on a detached curiosity in watching obtuse 
the participant expressed being impressed by the historical 
units growing over time. These unconventional 
size of the web.  
appropriations of existing infrastructure, such as logging 
Playful informatics drew attention to the non-neutrality of time online in unusual units, promote long-term 
personal informatics interfaces: one participant referred to 
relationships between personal informatics and their 
them as “sassy” [P16], and another commented that while it subjects that are not part of the mainstream personal 
“seems like it’s spitting out facts… it’s clearly intending to  
informatics narrative. 
get at me, somehow, and be provoking” [P4]. Several users 
Participants’ experiences and reactions to ludic informatics 
expressed frustration toward facts that were deliberately 
involved questioning the content of the interface, 
obtuse. One fact, for example, calculated how long a user 
undertaking creative engagement, and tampering with the 
has been on their most visited site without disclosing which 
data-gathering infrastructure. These informatics also raised 
site it was; this fact infuriated several participants who 
broader issues about the nature of the relationship between 
wanted to know “where they wasted the most time” and 
personal data and its subject, and the role of the designer 
expected our interface to show them this information. By 
 
 
and the data infrastructure in forming that relationship. always exhibit some degree of creepiness and malfunction; 
Ludic informatics supported alternative relationships 
their output will always be framed with respect to some pre-
toward personal data and prompted critical reflection on the existing set of values. Our strategies can serve as one 
goals and motivations of mainstream personal informatics. 
resource for designers to acknowledge and communicate 
the limitations, motivations, biases, and values embedded in 
DISCUSSION 
personal informatics systems to these systems’ users [22]. 
The Rhetoric and Scope of Personal Informatics 
In contexts in which these somewhat provocative 
Our deployment provoked discussions that problematized 
approaches might not be appropriate for deployment in a 
the “know thyself” rhetoric of personal informatics systems 
final product, they can still exist as a design resource for 
[16] by drawing attention to limitations to the “knowledge” 
encouraging designers’ reflection about how to 
that personal informatics systems can provide. These 
communicate the boundaries and seams in personal 
limitations were expressed in users’ corrective and 
informatics systems that might otherwise not be visible to 
dismissive reactions to malfunctioning informatics, and in 
the systems’ users.  
the acknowledgement of the incongruity between the 
motivations of data-gathering systems and the personal 
Personal Informatics for Data Justice 
informatics interfaces that use them, as reflected by creepy 
Our experiences of deploying the interface also call to 
informatics. Finally, as has been observed in other work 
attention the foggy mysticism, deep uncertainties, and lack 
around Facebook, even sophisticated and frequently used 
of knowledge that surround data-mining infrastructure. Like 
data-gathering systems can present only a part of the picture 
the participants in Dunne and Raby’s project who heard 
of a person’s behavior [23]. Our results highlight the ways 
stories of people picking up radio broadcasts in their dental 
that the limitations of human self-knowledge that often 
filings and felt their skin tingle when they sat near a TV [8], 
motivate personal informatics are balanced by the 
our participants were largely aware of data mining, and 
limitations of data gathering in the informatics, themselves, 
many expressed concerns about its implications. However, 
and that the data presented in personal informatics systems 
overwhelmingly—even among technical audiences—users 
are shaped by the infrastructures that are used to gather and 
are unsure of exactly which processes are happening, what 
present the data (as well as the fact that these data represent 
data are collected, where those data are stored, and what is 
a subset of all possible data). 
being done with them. One participant described our 
interface as a form of “white-hat hacking”: 
Though the “know thyself” approach has been one effective 
If you can log all of this stuff, then maybe just about 
method for affecting behavior change in fields ranging from 
any other Chrome extension can…. What you’re doing 
health to power usage [17], our deployment highlights a 
[…] is [showing] this what we could have tracked and 
different user relationship with personal informatics 
this is what we could have possibly done with it…. It’s 
systems: that the user can engage with the infrastructures 
like white-hat hacking in that way. [P13] 
underlying personal informatics by questioning the 
processes and the values embedded within them. Through 
When we asked participants for design suggestions, they 
creative tampering and dismissal of the self-optimization 
recommended changes that would facilitate understanding 
narrative, our interface supports ludic engagement and 
of the data-mining infrastructure: “There should be 
reflection on the values, possibilities, and limits of self-
descriptions of where the calculations came from” [P14]. 
optimization.  
Several participants pointed out a major difference between 
We do not think that these alternative modes of engagement 
our interface and other data-mining practices. As one 
are in fundamental opposition to the “know thyself” 
participant put it, “I gave you god powers to do this because 
rhetoric that dominates the personal informatics research 
I trusted you…. I want you to show me things that I didn’t 
domain; instead, we recommend that designers consider the 
opt into” [P16]. That is, our attempts to be creepy and 
strategies we have proposed as a method for designing and 
reveal infrastructure may have been dampened by the fact 
building multifaceted personal informatics systems. It is our 
that our participants “trusted us” with using their data and 
view that these strategies can be used to complement 
were fully aware of what we were doing. This is in contrast 
traditional personal informatics interfaces by providing 
to other data-mining systems, where users are generally not 
users with awareness of the underlying infrastructures and 
fully cognizant of or complicit in the tracking of their web-
alternative ways of interpreting their outputs. 
browsing data. Our design strategies promote visibility of 
the scope of data collection carried out in data-mining 
Further, just as Fogg argued that persuasive technologies 
infrastructures; this kind of visibility can either help to 
bear an ethical responsibility [10], personal informatics 
build users’ trust in these infrastructures or raise important 
systems may also be subject to the same ethical burden, 
questions about where these systems might introduce risks. 
particularly since most existing personal informatics 
systems have been created with the aim of persuading 
Another role that an interface like ours could play, in 
individual behavior change through self-reflection. 
addition to raising awareness of data mining infrastructures 
Pragmatically speaking, because these systems process 
and opening them up for critical discussion, is to explicitly 
imperfectly collected and interpreted user data, they will 
promote personal data efficacy and control. This idea is 
 
 
related to work in the area of usable privacy, where to others; in the future, we hope to deploy critical personal 
concrete visualizations of personal location data over time informatics to people with less technical expertise, less 
can highlight privacy concerns compared to less revealing familiarity with data-mining techniques, and less prior 
representations [25]. In our case, instead of describing the 
exposure to personal informatics tools. 
infrastructure in static text, interactive and personalized 
Since our approach of applying critical design techniques to 
computations might serve as mediators between users and 
personal informatics systems is relatively new, we chose to 
the infrastructure that surrounds them. 
approach data gathering in an open-ended and qualitative 
Or Not: Staying Open to Interpretation fashion. This research approach also introduces some 
An alternate relationship that critical personal informatics 
limitations on the kinds of data that we were able to gather. 
might facilitate between users and their data is that of a 
Our goal with this research was not to produce universal or 
playful but slightly disinterested observer, one who uses the 
generalizable findings but rather to demonstrate that the 
system as an object of curiosity rather than as a tool for 
approach of applying critical design to personal informatics 
self-mastery or data efficacy. For some users, the sense of 
is a useful thing to do, and hope that future work in this 
complacency toward data mining continued after they 
field will explore different methods for evaluating the 
acknowledged the extensive and poorly understood 
efficacy of critical personal informatics tools. 
infrastructure behind the interface. Users continued to use 
We have also taken a narrow definition of informatics: as 
and enjoy our system for other reasons: some users enjoyed 
mentioned before, our visualization is text-based, and the 
tampering with the results, others humorously engaged with 
computations that we perform on the web-browsing data do 
and appropriated misinformation, and still others described 
not utilize intensive machine learning techniques. Our 
the joy of watching numbers grow: “I refreshed it every 
approach was motivated in part by feasibility—both for the 
now and then just to see. Probably just as often as I refresh 
researchers implementing the interface used here and for 
Gmail... because I’m totally a stats guy. I just like looking 
others who might use our strategies—and in part by the 
at numbers [...] Once I look at my numbers for long 
desire to focus our contribution on participants’ 
enough, they’re just numbers” [P12]. Participants 
engagement with our provocative design strategies and to 
commented that they would enjoy the interface much less if 
not get distracted by the interface itself or its computational 
it had a clearer persuasive agenda: “It says that I’ve been on 
aspects (through complex data mining and pattern finding). 
Facebook for 27.83 hours…. Well, I kind of don’t care” 
However, we recognize that these pursuits are not 
[P15]. 
antithetical to the idea of revealing infrastructure. We have 
These relationships might evolve over time. Participants 
suggested that perceived simplicity invites reverse 
described being initially surprised by the unexpected 
engineering; further work in this area could reveal whether 
aspects of the interface, but then gradually became 
computational intensity promotes higher or lower levels of 
accustomed to it. In their interviews in Design Noir, Dunne 
critical engagement. 
and Raby asked a participant if she saw the table-shaped 
We hope that our design strategies could be used in 
critical object as a kind of gadget. The participant 
conjunction with traditional personal informatics 
responded that she saw it as a gadget now, but maybe if she 
approaches to draw users’ attention to the processes of data 
used it enough, it would “turn into a piece of furniture” [8]. 
collection and data presentation, as well as the implications 
There might be a similar role for our interface: initially, it 
and limitations of those processes. Because we intended our 
could be an instigator of data infrastructure awareness and a 
strategies to be generalizable, we are continuing to explore 
proponent of privacy settings, but as the radical nature 
their applicability both to different contexts, such as with 
wears off, it could become as much of an everyday object 
health and emotion data. We are also interested in 
as the infrastructure it aims to reveal. Maybe not a kitchen 
combining personal data sets across different settings, and a 
table, in the sense that the interface itself is not regularly 
breadth of “personal” data, such as data shared among 
used, but as something our participants “won’t uninstall… 
several people or, even more broadly, across social and 
but might sporadically come back to check my favorite 
political networks. 
[data reflections]” [P11]. 
CONCLUSION  
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Personal informatics represents a significant class of 
We recognize that the reactions to our interface were 
applications built atop ubiquitous data-gathering and data-
specific to the audience we recruited, their age and 
mining infrastructures. While these systems have the 
technical capabilities, as the culture in which they live and 
potential to allow people to reflect on their own behaviors 
study. While our study participants are not necessarily 
and habits, existing systems do a poor job of 
representative of all technology users (and did not include 
communicating the scope of data collected to build models 
hard-to-reach populations), it was representative of the 
of human activity, owning up to the errors possible when 
audience to whom traditional “quantified self” applications 
making sense of mined data, or explicitly acknowledging 
are generally marketed. However, as Star notes [24], things 
the values embedded in decisions about which data are 
that may be visible in infrastructure for some are invisible 
collected and how they are reflected back to the user. 
 
 
In this paper, we argue for the role of critical design in 10. Fogg, BJ. Persuasive computers: Perspectives and research 
challenging the status quo of personal informatics. We directions. Proc. CHI ’98, ACM Press (1998), 225–232. 
present three design strategies that encourage outward 
11. Friedman, B. Value-sensitive design. interactions 3, 6 
reflection on the data-mining infrastructures and personal 
(1996), 16–23. 
informatics interfaces, themselves—as well as the kinds of 
12. Gaver, W.W. (2002). Designing for Homo Ludens. I3 
relationships that these technologies typically afford—by 
Magazine, 12 (June 2002). 
suggesting the possibility of alternative relationships 
13. Jones, W. and Teevan, J. Personal information 
between personal data and its subjects. Our approach 
management. UW Press, Seattle, 2007. 
challenges the designers of personal informatics systems to 
incorporate representations of their systems’ limitations by 
14. Leahu, L., Schwenk, S. and Sengers, P. Subjective 
foregrounding their potential creepiness, their potential for objectivity: Negotiating emotional meaning. Proc. DIS 
malfunctions, and the strangeness revealed when systems 
’08 ACM Press (2008), 425–434. 
embody values different from those prescribed by 
15. Li, I., Dey, A.K. and Forlizzi, J. A stage-based model of 
mainstream systems. An analysis of how users experienced 
personal informatics systems. Proc. CHI 2010, ACM 
a system built around these provocative strategies affirms 
Press (2010), 557–566. 
that personal informatics systems can be used to raise 
16. Li, I., Dey, A.K. and Forlizzi, J. Know thyself: 
awareness about data mining, can promote efficacy and 
Monitoring and reflecting on facets of one’s life. Ext. 
control over personal data, and can also challenge the role 
Abstracts CHI ’10, ACM Press (2010), 4489–4492. 
of data analytics as persuasive agents. 
17. Li, I., Dey, A.K. and Forlizzi, J. Understanding my data, 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
myself: Supporting self-reflection with ubicomp 
This research was supported by Cornell’s Information 
technologies. Proc. UbiComp ’11, ACM Press (2011), 
Science and Communication Departments and the Hunter 
405–414. 
R. Rawlings III Cornell Presidential Research Scholarship. 
18. Mandiberg, M. Oil Standard (2006), 
Thanks to the Interaction Design Lab, Saeed Abdullah, 
http://turbulence.org/works/oil/ 
Alistair Ballantine, and Yang Yang Zheng, as well as our 
19. Peesapati, S.T., Schwanda, V., Schultz, J., Lepage, M., 
study participants. Special thanks to the anonymous 
Jeong, S. and Cosley, D. Pensieve: Supporting everyday 
reviewers for their helpful feedback and suggestions. 
reminiscence. Proc. CHI ’10, ACM Press (2010), 2027–
REFERENCES 
2036. 
1. Bell, G., Blythe, M. and Sengers, P. Making by making 
20. Redström, J., Jaksefic, P. and Ljungstrand, P. The 
strange: Defamiliarization and the design of domestic 
ChatterBox. Proc. HandheM and Ubiquitous Comp. '99, 
technologies. ACM Trans. Computer-Human Interaction 
Springer, 1999. 
12, 2 (June 2005), 149–173. 
21. Sengers, P. and Gaver, B. Design for Interpretation. 
2. Box, G.E.P. and Draper, N.R. Empirical model building 
Proc. HCII ’05. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (2005). 
and response surfaces. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 1987. 
22. Sengers, P., Boehner, K., David, S. and Kaye, J. 
3. Carver, C. and Scheier, M.F. On the self-regulation of 
Reflective design. Proc. Critical Computing, ACM 
behavior. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 
Press (2005), 49–58. 
2001. 
23. Sosik, V.S., Zhao, X. and Cosley, D. See friendship, sort 
4. Chalmers, M., MacColl, I. and Bell, M. (2003). Seamful 
of: How conversation and digital traces might support 
design: Showing the seams in wearable computing. Proc 
reflection on friendships. Proc. CSCW ’12, ACM Press 
Eurowearable, IEE (2003), 11–16. 
(2012), 1145–1154. 
5. Collusion. http://www.mozilla.org/en-US/collusion/ 
24. Star, S.L. The ethnography of infrastructure. American 
6. Deterding, S., Sicart, M., Nacke, L., O’Hara, K. and 
Behavioral Scientist, 43, 3 (1999), 377–391. 
Dixon, D. (2011). Gamification: Using game-design 
25. Tang, K.P., Hong, J.I. and Siewiorek, D.P. 
elements in non-gaming contexts. Ext. Abstracts 
Understanding how visual representations of location 
CHI ’11, ACM Press (2011), 2425–2428. 
feeds affect end-user privacy concerns. Proc. UbiComp 
7. DiSalvo, C. Adversarial Design. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
’11, ACM Press (2011), 207–216. 
MA, 2012. 
26. Top 5 Browsers. StatCounter (2012). 
8. Dunne, A., and Raby, F. Design noir: The secret life of 
http://gs.statcounter.com/#browser-ww-monthly-
electronic objects. Birkhäuser, Basel, Switzerland, 2001. 
201107-201206 
9. Endsley, M.R. The Role of Situation Awareness in 
27. Wilson, T.D. and Dunn, E.W. Self-knowledge: Its 
Naturalistic Decision Making. In Zsambok, C.E. and 
limits, value, and potential for improvement. Annual 
Klein, G.A. (Eds.), Naturalistic decision making. 
Review of Psychology, 55 (2004), 493–518.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1997, 269–282. 
 
 
 
