Sport, Education and Society
ISSN: 1357-3322 (Print) 1470-1243 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cses20
Algorithmic skin: health-tracking technologies,
personal analytics and the biopedagogies of
digitized health and physical education
Ben Williamson
To cite this article: Ben Williamson (2015) Algorithmic skin: health-tracking technologies,
personal analytics and the biopedagogies of digitized health and physical education, Sport,
Education and Society, 20:1, 133-151, DOI: 10.1080/13573322.2014.962494
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13573322.2014.962494
© 2014 The Author(s). Published by Taylor &
Francis.
Published online: 01 Oct 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2271
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cses20
Download by: [182.185.102.82] Date: 05 October 2016, At: 22:34
Sport, Education and Society, 2015
Vol. 20, No. 1, 133–151, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13573322.2014.962494
Algorithmic skin: health-tracking
technologies, personal analytics and the
biopedagogies of digitized health and
physical education
Ben Williamson*
School of Education, University of Stirling, Stirling, UK
The emergence of digitized health and physical education, or ‘eHPE’, embeds software algorithms
in the organization of health and physical education pedagogies. Particularly with the emergence of
wearableandmobileactivitytrackers,biosensorsandpersonalanalyticsapps,algorithmicprocesses
have an increasingly powerful part to play in how people learn about their own bodies and health.
This article specifically considers the ways in which algorithms are converging with eHPE through
the emergence of new health-tracking and biophysical data technologies designed for use in
educational settings. The first half of the article provides a conceptual account of how algorithms
‘do things’ in the social world, and considers how algorithms are interwoven with practices of
health tracking. In the second half, three key issues are articulated for further exploration: (1)
health tracking as a ‘biopedagogy’ of bodily optimization based on data-led and algorithmically
mediated understandings of the body; (2) health tracking as a form of pleasurable self-surveillance
utilizing data analytics technologies to predict future bodily probabilities and (3) the ways that
health-tracking produces a body encased in an‘algorithmic skin’, connected to a wider ‘networked
cognitive system’. These developments and issues suggest the need for greater attention to how
algorithmic systems are embedded in emerging eHPE technologies and pedagogies.
Keywords: Algorithms; Analytics; Biopedagogy; Data; Dataveillance; Health tracking;
Self-quantification
What does the study of computer algorithms have to offer to research in health and
physical education? In a recent article in Sport, Education and Society, Evans and
Davies (2014) argue for a research agenda exploring new forms of the governance of
health and physical education curricula and pedagogy, while in his provocation for
this new Research Forum section of Sport, Education and Society, Gard (2014)
demandsthat researchersconsider critically the‘digital future’ of healthand physical
education. Responding to both, this article explores an important emerging
dimension of governance in the digital future of health and physical education: the
current growth of digital technologies designed to enable students to track, monitor
and analyze their physical activity. Variously referred to as self-tracking, personal
*School of Education, University of Stirling,Pathfoot,Stirling,FK94LA,UK.Email:ben.williamson
@stir.ac.uk
© 2014 The Author(s). PublishedbyTaylor&Francis.
ThisisanOpenAccessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense(http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycited.Themoralrightsofthenamedauthor(s)havebeenasserted.

134 B. Williamson
informatics, personal analytics or technologies of the ‘quantified self’, these digital
technologies are part of a rapidly growing global market in wearable electronics and
biosensor platforms designed to allow users to collect and analyze biophysical data
on their own physical activities and health. Designed around algorithms and
physiological models expressed in computer code, these devices are increasingly
augmenting, mediating and governing the ways in which individuals and social
groups engage with their own bodies and health, and transforming the ways that
people undertake physical activity.
This article is based on an initial survey of health-tracking products designed for
use by schoolchildren. Rather than viewing such products in isolation, I consider
them in the context of emerging empirical and theoretical literature on self-tracking
inordertoraisesomecriticalchallengesforthefutureofphysicaleducation.Ifurther
situate these technologies as part of an emerging trend to configure schools as ‘data
platforms’ within which a wide range of data tracking, sensing and analytics
technologies are being mobilized to monitor and measure student activities,
performances and outcomes (Mayer-Schönberger & Cukier, 2014). The emergence
of what I term ‘smart schools’ in which networked database technologies have
been thoroughly embedded (Williamson, 2014a), and that Lupton (2014) calls
‘sentient schools’, signifies how data-tracking technologies are now being positioned
to provide a constant stream of knowledge, in real time, about the activity and
performance of every aspect of the institution, from facilities and administration
to classroom pedagogy and student progress. By focusing on health and activity
tracking devices in terms of their underlying algorithmic systems and processes, I
argue for greater attention in health and physical education research (as well as
in educational research more generally) to how algorithms are interweaving with
processes of educational governance and control in these emerging smart and
sentient schools.
By governance I mean two things. First, as Evans and Davies (2014) and Gard
(2014) have already argued, and reflecting wider shifts in educational governance
(Ball & Junemann, 2012), health and physical education is increasingly being
governed by a hybrid mix of commercial providers with business interests as well as
governmentagenciesactingonpublichealthagendas.Thismixingandnetworkingof
actors from the public and private sectors is all part of what Macdonald (2014)
articulates as a characteristically neoliberal approach to the governance of physical
education through diversifying resources, expertise and services locally and globally.
Within this, physical education is now being shaped by discourses of markets,
opportunity, choice and competition. But I also draw on conceptualizations of
governance from research that has focused on the ways in which human beings and
bodies have been understood, managed and treated—either for purposes of care and
cure or for individual and social reform and improvement—through ‘biopolitical’
techniquesassociatedwith medical,psychologicalandneurologicalsciences(Lemke,
2011; Rose, 1999; Rose & Abi-Rached, 2013). According to this body of work,
medical science, psychology and neuroscience have become central to how people
are governed today, and increasingly in how they are encouraged to understand and

Algorithmic skin 135
care for themselves. In the clinic, such processes of governing have always been at
least partly technical, relying on various technologies such as diagnostic survey
instruments, psychological tests and newer developments like brain imaging. My
argument is that health tracking is an emerging technology of governance, enabling
people individually and socially to understand and care for their bodies, and to
identifyproblemsrequiringcureorimprovement.Thealgorithmsinstalledinhealth-
tracking devices act to translate physiological signals recorded from the body into
data, presented as numbers and visualizations, that enable this kind of bodily self-
governing to take place.
As a market in such devices for young people and children grows, many targeted
for use in health and physical education in schools, I argue, it is imperative to
understand better thefunctioning of suchdevices, the ways they might interlace with
school pedagogies and how they might influence how students learn about their own
bodies and health. These ‘self-mediation interfaces with health’, as Rich and Miah
(2014, p. 301) describe them, have become ‘inextricable from the manner in which
people learn about health’. This is not a case of technological determinism, but a
complex interweaving of algorithmic processes with commercially produced tracking
devices and contemporary public health agendas into physical education pedagogies
that are intended to govern and shape the ways young people see and care for
themselves. I argue that health and physical activity tracking technologies aimed at
the schools market provide the hardware and software for an emerging form of
digitally mediated biopedagogy, and speculate on how such a digital biopedagogy
mightbeproducingabodythatiswrappedinalayerof‘algorithmicskin’—thatis,an
individual whose physical activities, movement and overall healthiness are at least
partly animated by algorithmic processes.
To be clear, the article is intended as a response to Gard’s(2014) provocation in
this Research Forum section to consider how digital technologies might shape the
future of digitized health and physical education—or ‘eHPE’ as he terms it. By
engaging with recent critical literature on algorithms and exploring recent technical
developments, it offers some critically informed speculations about the implications
of self-tracking and the role of algorithms in shaping and governing the future of
health and physical education.
Socio-algorithmic interaction
In his account of the agendas shaping physical education’s future, Gard (2014)
suggests that it is likely to become increasingly digitized, especially as new
technologies of ‘big data’, surveillance, ‘exergaming’ and automation converge with
current political, economic and public health imperatives. Some digital technologies
are already well embedded in physical education curricula and pedagogies, such
as fitness testing, movement analysis software, kinetic videogaming and digital
pedometers. Mobile and wearable physical activity monitoring devices that collect
biophysical data from users are now being developed and promoted for the physical
education schools market. These emerging forms of eHPE depend on computer

136 B. Williamson
technologies and software that, like all computational processes, are constituted by
algorithmic procedures expressed in computer code. The algorithmic constitution of
software is an emerging topic in social scientific research, but is virtually absent in
educational research (Williamson, 2014a). It is worth considering for a moment why
a deeper consideration of algorithms, and what has been termed ‘algorithmic power’
(Beer, 2009), is necessary for eHPE research. My approach is not to specify every
technical detail of how an ‘algorithmic system’ works, but ‘to be able to understand
some of the logics or principles of their functioning in order to critically engage with
the ways in which systems work on a theoretical level’ (Bucher, 2012, p. 1177).
In his recent book Nine Algorithms That Changed the Future, MacCormick (2012,
p. 3) defines an ‘algorithm’ simply as ‘a precise recipe that specifies the exact
sequence of steps required to solve a problem’. However, algorithms are more than
simply computer science abstractions and routines for sorting and structuring data.
As Bucher (2012, p. 1165) contends, ‘algorithmic architectures dynamically
constitute certain forms of social practice’. According to this view, much of
contemporary everyday life in a heavily mediated world is governed by various
sorting and filtering algorithms determining what users encounter online, perhaps
most obviously in our encounters with major commercial organizations such as
Google and Facebook (Bucher, 2012; Mager, 2012). Algorithms have also emerged
as an important object of analysis in studies of science (Mackenzie, 2006), cultural
politics (Lash, 2007), identity formation (Cheney-Lippold, 2011), surveillance
(Amoore, 2009), popular culture (Beer, 2013) and digital governance (Williamson,
2014b). Such studies go beyond computer science conceptions of algorithms to
account for their contemporary social power. As Beer (2013, p. 81) argues,
‘algorithms are an integrated and irretractable part of everyday social processes’
that can ‘reinforce, maintain or even reshape visions of the social world, knowledge
and encounters with information’. Algorithms are not only products of social,
political, economic and cultural processes, but also productive of further social,
political, economic and cultural effects (Kitchin & Dodge, 2011). Given such
accounts of the complex relational interweaving and interaction between algorithms
and social worlds, it is perhaps more accurate to write of ‘socio-algorithmic’
processes and practices, and to acknowledge that algorithms are both socially
produced and socially productive, than to imply that they act deterministically as
mechanical or objective technologies.
Perhaps most significantly, however, algorithms privilege automaticity, quantifica-
tion, proceduralization and automation in human endeavours, and reflect an his?
toricaltensionbetweennotionsofautonomoushumansocialityandtheimpositionof
systemizedprocedures(Gillespie, 2014b).A concern with the‘politicsof algorithms’
reflects these longer concerns over the insertion of computational procedures into
human practice or, as Neyland (2014, p. 5) argues, over the modelling of ‘human
action through mathematical logics of order’. In order for an algorithmic system to
function, he claims, the world outside of the system has to be mathematically
modelledinsuchawaythatitcanbecomepartof‘thesocialworldofthealgorithmic
system’ (Neyland, 2014, pp. 10–11). Moreover, Gillespie (2014a) argues, as

Algorithmic skin 137
algorithms are increasingly being designed to anticipate users and make predictions
about their future behaviours, users are now reshaping their practices to suit the
algorithms they depend on. This constructs ‘calculated publics’, the ‘calculated
approximation of a public’ through its traceable activities and the subsequent
presentation of a public back to itself that shapes its very sense of itself, thus helping
to constitute ‘publics that would not otherwise exist except that the algorithm called
them into existence’ (Gillespie, 2014a, p. 189).
The notion of a calculated public, both measured and presented back to itself, is
important in considering the role of self-tracking technologies and algorithms
interacting with students in eHPE. Ultimately, we need to consider how certain
forms of health data are chosen for collection by these devices; inquire into the
evaluative criteria, promises of objectivity and models of health and the body built
into their algorithmic systems; consider how these algorithms are constructed to
anticipate users’ behaviour and predict their likely futures; and examine how these
calculative activities conjure new publics and new subject positions into being.
The ‘quantified self’ as a ‘calculated public’
It is worth briefly restating at this stage that the use of health tracking in eHPE is an
emerging issue, with little evidence to date that there has been any sustained take-up
of such devices in schools. The point I want to make is that a market for health
trackinginphysicaleducationisemergingthatislinkedtoamuchwiderglobaltrend
often captured in the term ‘quantified self’, and that by taking seriously this
movement, its associated technologies and the basic algorithmic functioning of its
models, we may be able to apprehend some of the issues facing educators in the
digital future of physical education. Focused on the ideal of a ‘data-driven life’ and
‘self-knowledge through numbers’, self-quantifiers use statistical data collected
from self-tracking mobile devices, electronic biosensors and data analytics apps to
understand their personal health and, on that basis, to modify and optimize their
health behaviours (Wolf, 2010). The term ‘quantified self’ has since been applied to
theuseofhealth-trackingdevicesforvariouspracticesof‘lifelogging’,‘lifestreaming’,
‘self-science’ and ‘personal informatics’.
To give a general technical sense of this area, digital health-tracking devices
include a variety of smartwatches, wearable biosensors, accelerometers, pedometers,
biometrics, GPS devices and Wi-fi or Bluetooth-enabled clothing and wearable body
metric textiles, plus assorted smartphone applications and peripherals. Swan (2012)
describes an emerging ‘sensor mania’, where personal health-tracking technologies
are part of a vast interconnected ‘Internet of Things’. Twinned with these devices, a
huge range of apps to support user-led health data collection are available to track
and analyze physical movement, food and drink intake, energy expended, sleep
levels, blood glucose levels, cholesterol levels, calories burned, mood and emotion,
inactivity and more. These apps allow users to interpret and visualize the health data
collected through tracking devices, and to use these insights from the data to inform
their health behaviour choices. Some health-tracking apps also feature built-in

138 B. Williamson
‘personal analytics’ capacities that permit users to synchronize and connect different
datasets in order to generate more fine-grained data about their own health, dietary
and physical activities.
Major computing and mobile technology companies have entered the field,
including AppleandGoogle, and a lively entrepreneurial‘start-up’ scene has emerged
(Boessel, 2013). Strong interest in self-quantification has also been expressed by
medical professionals and by governments, and health tracking is an emerging topic
ingovernmenthealthstrategies.TheUKorganizationNesta(2014)hasdocumented
the emergence of a number of trends related to personal health data for medical,
governmental and commercial purposes alike, and speculated on the further
emergence of devices and practices such as wearable sensing technologies, biometric
cards, health-based ‘data currencies’, body ‘hacking’ and data-driven citizen ‘care
circles’. In addition, a distinctive cultural discourse has emerged around these
health-tracking devices and apps. The emphasis is placed on personal goals and
challenges, ‘life projects’, personal discovery, motivational prompts and nudges,
being rewarded for meeting or beating goals and using insights gained from data to
make healthy lifestyle choices. The language of social science is also invoked through
commitments to ‘self-ethnography’ and ‘self-science’. The quantified self is an
emerging hybrid assembled from social science methods, public health agendas,
digitaltracking,socialnetworkingandthe‘start-up’discourseassociatedwithSilicon
Valley entrepreneurship.
There is now evidence of self-tracking and quantification technologies being
designed for use by younger people, including very young children. Within the
quantified self community itself, there are some emerging indications of ‘quantified
child’ activities mobilizinghealth-tracking technologies and techniques.A numberof
commercial child-tracking devices and applications have been launched to allow
parents to generate knowledge about their child’s health. These include sensor-
enabled ‘smart diapers’ to enable urine analysis and identify health patterns, and
‘smart baby clothing’ activated with ‘sleep algorithms’ and temperature and
respiratory sensors to continually monitor infant health (E. Williamson, 2014).
The physical education schools market is an obvious target for health-tracking
products. A key emerging area is health-tracking devices and apps for students that
are designed to encourage healthy lifestyles, aid dietary planning and encourage
physical activity. Popular features of health-related apps for children include the
concept of caring for virtual creatures by fulfilling their dietary and fitness needs,
often combined with various gaming and competition elements and online social
media environments (Hswen et al., 2013). For example, Zamzee consists of a
wearable physical activity meter twinned with a social media experience and per?
sonalizable avatar, as well as online leaderboards and facilities for accessing indi?
vidualactivitygraphs,sendingstatusupdatesandearningvirtualcurrencies.Another
hybrid healthgaming/social media platformforchildren is Sqord, which consists of a
wearable data logger, an online social media environment and a personalizable on-
screen avatar called a PowerMe. Sqord is marketed as ‘one part social media, one

Algorithmic skin 139
part game platform, and one part fitness tracker’. Extensively piloted and tested in
schools in the USA, Sqord is targeted firmly at the physical education market:
Sqord gives you an administrative reporting tool with quantifiable metrics on the
physical activity, levels, and participation of each of your players. No more
guesswork or gray areas in measuring physical activity. Sqord puts the numbers
in plain view, and allows your teachers and coaches to see exactly what’s what in
real-time. (Sqord, 2014)
Sqord users can compete with one another on an online leaderboard through
everyday physical challenges, as measured by their activity trackers, and are able to
win medals and ‘sqoins’ as rewards for completion of goals, which can be used to
purchase upgrades and personalized features. The Sqord social media environment
promotes peer competition as a motivational technique. Sqord also provides an
administrative reporting tool for educators to access metrics on the physical activity
levels and participation of each child player. Likewise, Polar Active is a wristwatch
devicethattwinswiththeonlinepolargofit.comonlineenvironmenttoallowteachers
to view, analyze and evaluate their students’ physical activity. This product, along
with others, forms part of an emerging market in wearable physical activity monitors
now being promoted to schools that combine tracking and sensing capacities with
built-in algorithms for estimating health (Schaefer, Van Loan, & German, 2014).
Sqord, Polar Active, Zamzee and others act as a bridge between the quantified self
trend and physical education pedagogy, and represent a convergence of devices,
software, apps, techniques and discourses of self-quantification with pedagogic
practices, commercial imperatives and governmental health agendas. As Rich and
Miah (2014, p. 305) have argued, ‘increasingly, younger people engage with these
technologiesaspedagogicaldevicesthroughwhichtheylearntorecognizethemselves
and/or others as good, healthy, active and/or having desirable bodies in the pursuit
of healthiness’. This hybrid mix of pedagogic technologies and modes of self-
management is ordered and organized (at least partly) by underlying algorithms and
their inbuilt models of the body in order to make the health of the child amenable to
measurement and management. Self-quantification is, then, more than a participat-
ory online movement: it invites powerful commercial, governmental and medical
research involvement. These are not neutral and value-free activities, but politically
and economically charged industries for which individual health data can act
variouslyassourcesforgovernmentalpolicymaking,academicknowledgeproduction
and revenue creation. As such, self-quantification produces a ‘calculable public’,a
public that is presented back to itself through the data organized and coordinated by
algorithmic approximations of its traceable health activities. Such a public is made
amenable to being calculated upon by a spectrum of government and medical
agencies, third-party analysts and commercial data industries. In turn, it is incited to
identify itself and act upon itself in terms of those numbers and their modes of
visualization. Having identified some of the key technologies and techniques of self-
quantification, including those designed for use by children in educational settings,
the rest of the article provides an initial conceptualization of the operational

140 B. Williamson
principles of these algorithmic systems—that is, it does not provide a specification of
the technical functioning of the algorithms at work, but an account of the
proceduralization of human actions that they model.
Biopedagogies of body optimization
Self-quantification represents a new algorithmically mediated pedagogic technique
for governing and ordering the body. Rich and Miah (2014) have recently called for
more attention to the ‘public pedagogies’ of health technologies—the pedagogical
processes operating in the kind of digital devices and environments described above
that bear on what and how people learn about their bodies and health. Elsewhere in
the physical education literature, ‘biopedagogy’ is an accurate term for these new
digitally mediated techniques of bodily monitoring and enhancement. If ‘pedagogy’
refers to forms of conduct, knowledge and practice acquired from someone or
something considered an appropriate provider, as Bernstein (2000) conceptualized
it, ‘biopedagogy’ refers to pedagogies in which the actual physical body, bodily
practices and healthy conduct of the learner are made into the object of intervention.
Such ‘body pedagogies’ generate and convey knowledge, competencies, skills and
moral codes, which define what the body is and ought to be, whose and what bodies
have status and value, and what ‘body work’ needs to be done to make one’s body
‘fit’ (Evans & Rich, 2011).
These pedagogies, and the digital companies that provide the devices, apps and
resources to mediate them, have a crucial role to play in the governing of children’s
health. Governing through physical education pedagogies here refers, as Vander
Schee (2009, p. 558) phrases it after Foucault, to the deployment of ‘particular
knowledgesandtruthsaboutthewaysinwhichindividualsshouldconducttheirlives
for the betterment of self and society’. Indeed, from this perspective, pedagogy is
itself a governing practice (Pykett, 2012). Thus, in previous studies of physical
education, technologies such as fitness testing and performance data collection have
been conceptualized as pedagogic technologies of governing aimed at optimizing the
well-being of both the individual and the social order as a whole.
The emerging technologies of the quantified self, including those designed for
children and with pedagogical intentions in physical education, have become central
tohowphysicalactivityisnowbeingclassified,categorizedandrepresented,andthus
governed and made amenable to management and improvement. Algorithms have
been positioned as powerful classificatory mechanisms for moulding and making
health and physical activity data intelligible, in ways that govern and order the body
of the child and influence how children learn about their bodies and health. Just as
‘thedecisiontoclassifystudentsbytheirstandardizedachievementandaptitudetests
valorizes some kinds of knowledge skills and renders other kinds invisible’ (Bowker
& Star, 1999, p. 6), the health-tracking technologies being promoted in physical
education can be understood as sorting systems for classifying and categorizing
physical activity, thus valorizing certain kinds of activities and rendering others as
undesirable. Such forms of classification are not mere bureaucratic formalities but

Algorithmic skin 141
holdseriousmaterialforceasthreadsthataretiedtothewaysthatschoolchildrenare
likely to learn to conduct their own lives and bodies.
Although the health-tracking technologies emerging in physical education vary
slightly from product to product, based on proprietary algorithms that calculate and
present data differently, they are all based on standard algorithmic classification
systems that make individuals’ health data combinable, comparable and amenable to
data visualization and representation. In order for these technologies to function,
certain expert understandings and classifications of the body and of healthiness,
derived from various sciences, have to be accommodated through being mathemat-
ically encoded in physiological models and algorithmic systems. In devices targeted
at schools, such as Sqord, a particular socially produced understanding of the
malleableandimprovablechild’sbodyhasbeenfoldedintotheclassificationsystems
andalgorithmsthroughwhichit functions. AsNeyland (2014,p.11)putsit,thetask
of an algorithm designer is to ‘build a world out there into a world in here, in the
algorithmic machine’. In the case of self-tracking, monitoring and personal analytics
devices in eHPE, this can be rearticulated as a concern with transforming the child’s
body into a calculable model in the algorithmic machine. The algorithmic models
that are built into pedagogical self-tracking technologies combine various bioscien-
tific understandings, physiological models and forms of medical and psychological
expertise. Devices such as Polar Active, Zamzee and Sqord classify the child’s body
and health in ways that are intelligible to children, and that touch them in very real
corporealwaysbyenforcingparticularnormsandattachingstatisticalmeasurements,
as encoded in their algorithms, of bodily health and physical activity. This
algorithmic and classificatory system enforces a particular understanding of what
‘health’ is, as defined through the classificatory scheme written into their algorithms,
which can thread back into the ways that schoolchildren will come to see, identify
and conduct themselves.
Such socio-algorithmic processes are not neutral, objective sources of knowledge.
Instead, as Lupton (2013, pp. 14–15) argues, ‘the data themselves and the algori?
thmsthatinterpretthemandmakepredictionsbasedonthemaresocialactants’with
a ‘profound impact on how individuals view themselves and the world’. Self-
quantification encourages children to understand their bodies as ‘personal laborat-
ories’, and in terms of ‘objective’ data and metrics rather than subjective, haptic and
sensory-embodied knowledge. It makes the body of the individual visible in terms of
data, calculable as numbers, and on that basis amenable to enhancement, though as
Nafus and Sherman (2014, p. 1793) caution, self-trackers
interact with algorithms not as blind, mindless dupes, but as active participants in a
dialogue that moves between data as an externalization of self and internal,
subjective, qualitative understandings of what the data means.
While there is certainly interpretive flexibility in how users engage with technologies,
self-quantificationalgorithmsalsodostructureandshapepossibilitiesforaction.The
ways in which health-tracking technologies may be enforced through their use in
school pedagogies and curricula may also work to reproduce and solidify social

142 B. Williamson
norms and expectations around child health, not least as they interact with existing
public health agendas around, for example, obesity.
As a result of these emerging biopedagogies of self-quantification in eHPE,
children are increasingly, it seems likely, going to be incited to view their own bodies
as malleable, correctable and improvable, and to experiment upon themselves to
make themselves better than they are. Sqord, for example, encourages child self-
trackersto customizetheir‘PowerMe’ avatarsandto displaythemto oneanother via
a social media environment. As the website explains,
Everything in Sqord centers around you and your fully customizable PowerMe.
Make yours look like you, or make it how you want to look that day. Your friends
will see you your way, and you’ll see them how they want to be seen. (http://www.
sqord.com/)
Consequently, the body of the learner has been made into a seemingly legitimate
pedagogic site for presentational enhancement. The point being made by Sqord and
similar products is that the body can be taught, improved and optimized, and
through ‘the process of collecting, visualising, sharing and monitoring such data on
one’s body in a public space, users learn about the body in terms of appropriate
forms of maintenance, development and repair’ (Rich & Miah, 2014, pp. 305–306).
Self-quantification is part of a technologically solutionist obsession with ‘tuning’ and
‘perfecting’thebodywiththerightalgorithms.Thechild’sbodyismadeamenableto
being recoded and reprogrammed, manipulated, enhanced and optimized according
to new socially desirable norms as modelled, organized and ordered in algorithmic
system of self-quantification.
Pleasurable predictive dataveillance
A central issue for researchers of self-quantification with children and in physical
education is that of surveillance. In particular, self-tracking devices, when twinned
with powerful data analytics software, can transform simple ‘monitoring’ into the
‘prediction’ of children’s future behaviours and bodily health. In contrast to typical
images of digital surveillance being undertaken covertly by government agencies and
commercial companies, self-tracking appears to be a more benevolent form of
surveillance. Indeed, as with many other forms of digital ‘dataveillance’, individuals
increasingly submit to being monitored and tracked by voluntarily surrendering their
personal data (Raley, 2013).
Part of the seduction of voluntary surveillance throughhealthtracking, particularly
as it is now being marketed to children and schools, is the tactic of designing the
technologies along the lines of videogames or competitions. Creature-based apps
such as Sqord, Fitter Critters and Zamzee represent the ‘gamification’ of digital
health among children. Many mainstream self-tracking devices and apps feature
gaming elements, such as competing with others on specific physical activity
challenges or racing to complete goals. Programmes and devices that promote
healthy eating habits using points and fitness and weight loss coaches for game

Algorithmic skin 143
consoles are obvious examples of gamification. These techniques promise to make
everyday tasks more rewarding, fulfilling and fun, using incentivization and rewards
to shape desirable behaviours such as physical exercise or healthy eating habits.
Whitson (2013) refers to gamification strategies in self-tracking as ‘pleasurable
surveillance’—a kind of self-monitoring and self-policing done voluntarily and for
fun. However, the algorithms that enable children’s physical activity and health data
to be translated into games and competitions are not politically innocent. Many of
the algorithms enabling these devices and apps are proprietary to the commercial
companiesproducingthem,arevariableinwhatandhowtheymeasureandcalculate
the data and are rife with embedded value judgments that reward some activities and
not others.
Applying a concern with data-based surveillance to health tracking, Ruckenstein
(2014, p. 69) argues these devices make formerly ‘unknown’ aspects of bodies and
lives more ‘detectable’, ‘transparent’ and ‘visible’. Through such personal analytics
being promoted in physical education in products like Sqord, the individual child is
to be‘sliced’ upor deconstructed into data flows; thebody and mindabstracted into
data visualizations, composites of information and representations. For example,
Sqordenables students togeneratedatavisualizations thatchart‘activitypoints’ won
foractivities they haveperformed atan hourly, daily orweeklyscale, as well as to use
these activity points as a form of virtual ‘currency’ to purchase customizations for
their graphical on-screen avatar. These informational and decorporealized data-
based versions of the self, or ‘data doubles’, enable children to see, know and
understand the problems of their corporeal selves through seemingly objective,
scientific and reliable representations of the data. The algorithms at work in such
devices and apps enable biophysical data to be captured as an input, and then
translated in real time into a digital output as numbers and data visualizations that
have the power to persuade students of their bodies’ problems and then nudge and
coerce them to reform themselves. Personal analytics do not just render the body as
abstract graphs, tables and figures in real time, but make it actionable.
It is clear that the emergence of health-tracking technologies in schools enable
a pleasurable and voluntary form of dataveillance to become one of physical
education’s future pedagogies. It should also be noted of course that there are
continuities here with how fitness testing, pedometers and movement analysis
softwarehavealreadybeenacceptedassurveillanttechnologiesinphysicaleducation.
Indeed, the widespread acceptance of fitness and activity assessment tools like
Fitnessgram in the USA suggests that newer digital forms of personal analytics will
beeasilyaccommodatedintophysicaleducationprovisioninschoolsinwaysthatwill
exacerbateexistingusesofstudentdataforsurveillantandperformativepurposes.As
Gard (2014, p. 833) notes in relation to Fitnessgram:
there is evidence that schools … are structuring their physical education
programmes—and therefore the information they use to instruct children and
explain their programmes to the broader public—in ways that prioritise student
performance in these data collection exercises. … Fitnessgram is one example—
doubtless others will follow—of how HPE might be digitally shoehorned into

144 B. Williamson
conformity with the worldwide trend towards measurability, accountability,
performativity and standardisation in other areas of the curriculum.
Thelatest upgradesto Fitnessgramitself alsofeature data-miningfunctionality, web-
based data collection, mobile apps, and reader-friendly graphical visualizations that
demonstratehownewtechnicaldevelopmentsinmobileactivitymonitoringanddata
analytics are feeding back into existing surveillance products. These are making the
collection, accumulation and dissemination of large datasets about children’s
physical health and fitness more easy and efficient to administer to accomplish.
Lupton (2014, p. 9) suggests that the use of digital self-tracking devices and apps in
school-based health and physical education is a form of ‘imposed self-tracking’ and
argues that ‘some physical education teachers are beginning to require their students
to wear such devices as heart-rate monitors to determine whether they are fully
participating in set exercise activities and to compare their exertions with other
students’. We can see from such examples how the data are becoming not just a tool
for measurement, but are actually influencing pedagogic practice, curriculum design
and disciplinary techniques. This is leading, as Selwyn (2014, p. 9) notes in relation
to digital data use in education more generally, ‘to a recursive state where data
analysis begins to produce educational settings, as much as educational settings
producing data’.
Moreover, the personal analytics embedded in health-tracking and activity-
monitoring technologies are part of a much wider socio-technical trend in the
development of predictive ‘machine learning’ techniques. ‘Machine learning’ is the
term to describe ‘intelligent’ software systems that utilize adaptive algorithms and
statistical models to analyze users’ data in order to anticipate or even predict their
future actions. Utilizing ‘taught algorithms’, Mackenzie (2013, p. 399) argues,
‘programmers construct models that predict what people will do’ through ‘trans-
forming data on events, actions, behaviours, beliefs and desires’ into probabilistic
predictions of the future that then can be used to decide on the action to be taken in
the present. The statistical models and algorithms of predictive machine learning
techniques are enmeshed in powerful social currents of thought. Machine learning is
part of a world in which ‘probabilistic outcomes’ and predictions about the future
increasingly influence people’s ‘everyday actions, habits and practices’ (Mackenzie
2013, p. 396). Driven by the machine learning techniques and the adaptive
algorithms of personal analytics, health tracking may then be understood not just
asareal-timedatapracticebutasananticipatoryor‘future-tense’practice,premised
on the use of devices programmed with the power to predict probable personal
actions based on the analysis of data traces of past actions.
Throughself-trackingtechnologiesofanticipationinphysicaleducation,thestudent
istobesolicitedasalittleexpertofthefuture,enabledtoanticipate,calculate,predict
and project a spectrum of bodily probabilities and possibilities. The student’s data
double is the source for algorithmically mediated modes of self-anticipation and
projections of possible futures. As such, self-quantification techniques in physical
education might be approached analytically as an emerging form of both pleasurable

Algorithmic skin 145
and predictive biopedagogy—a pedagogy of bodily inspection, monitoring and
improvement based on the anticipatory technologies and algorithmic systems of
predictiveanalyticsandenactedthroughtechniquesofgamificationanddataveillance.
All of these raise an important issue for the digital future of health and physical
education. The predictive capacity of personal analytics makes it possible to apply
algorithmicprocessestopredictstudents’likelyfuturesand,onthatbasis,topre-empt
their actions and activities. Yet little is known about the selection, values and
assumptions of the ‘training data’ that machine learning algorithms act upon. Such
datamaybeincomplete,partial,orevenincompatiblewiththedatathatthealgorithm
willoperateon‘inthewild’(Gillespie,2014b).Decisionsabouthowtotrainamachine
learning algorithm will always be made by algorithm designers and computer
programmers. Given that such data can only ever remain partial and approximate,
andhowtheyreflectthevaluejudgmentsandassumptionsbuiltintothedata’smodels,
thereisarealpossibilityherethatstudents’healthinessmaybeincreasinglydetermined
by automated procedures, and their future lives shaped by algorithmic systems
embeddedinthevaluesystemsanddecisionsofcomputercodersratherthanphysical
educators. This certainly adds an extra and largely hidden layer of complexity to the
trend in outsourcing of health, sport and physical education (Williams, Hay, &
Macdonald, 2011), further complicating existing concerns about the suppliers
authorized to select physical education resources or to define the quality of physical
educationmaterials(Evans&Davies,2014).
Corporealgorithmic connections
So far we have considered how educational health-tracking devices constitute a new
form of biopedagogy, and identified the surveillant and predictive capacities of such
technologiesforthedata-basedshapingofstudents’futurelives.Butwhathappensto
the body of the student in practices of health and activity tracking in eHPE? In line
with post-humanist literature which has sought to erase the boundaries between
humans and non-humans and to reveal the technological metaphors that we use to
understandourselves(e.g.Hayles,1999),manyofthemetaphorsusedtodescribethe
technologies and techniques of the quantified self routinely juxtapose the body with
machinery. This includes metaphors of measurable ‘input/output’ ratios from
cybernetics, vehicular imagery of ‘a dashboard for your body’, computer imagery
of ‘body hacking’ and the ‘body as the ultimate computer’ and data-related
references to the body as a ‘data factory emitting digital exhaust’ (Lupton, 2013,
pp. 26–27). Using such technological metaphors of intense human–computer
interaction, people are represented merely as ‘nodes’ in the ‘Internet of Things’,
exchanging data with other people as well as with other objects and devices through
networked communication and informational infrastructures:
The body in this discourse becomes positioned as a ‘smart machine’ linked with
other ‘smart machines’. Bodily sensations become phenomena that are mediated
and augmented through machines, transformed into data and then communicated
back to the user. This vision of the body as augmented via self-tracking devices

146 B. Williamson
present a digital cyborg, in which such devices not only become prosthetics of the
body but extend the body into a network with other bodies and with objects.
(Lupton 2013, p. 27)
Through health-tracking data, the body appears increasingly as part of an extended
and distributed digital information system. Similarly, in their article on the
pedagogies of self-tracking, Rich and Miah (2014, p. 308) describe a condition of
‘posthuman technological mediation and prostheticisation’, in which ‘new sensorial
experiences, such as the wearing of fitbit health bands, which vibrate when you
achieve your activity goals, combine different pedagogical forces to produce em?
bodied ways of knowing’. Self-tracking technologies targeted for use in physical edu?
cationlikewiselinkchildrenintodistributednetworksofhybridsensorialexperiences
that are produced through an amalgam of wearable devices, physical gaming
activities and algorithmic modes of data analysis and visualization.
Certainly devices like Sqord connect students prosthetically to various wearable
devices. But the connection of the body to the machine in health tracking is subtler
than this. Rather than the cyborg image of the artificially prosthetized body, self-
tracking connects bodies into a web of data, analytics and algorithmic forms of
power—a ‘corporealgorithmic’ coupling of bodies and flows of data. From such a
perspective, the body can be perceivedas part of a distributed system of information,
interfaces, data and devices that coordinate, pattern and connect it up to wider
networks. The body in such imagery is conceived as a biological core, a skeletal,
muscular and nervous system, which is increasingly surrounded and augmented
by technical and information infrastructures, a range of ‘artificial skins’ and a
‘networked cognitive system’ (Beer, 2013, p. 131). These artificial skins, however,
are leaky and porous with the wider informational environment so that the ‘mobility
ofdatameets themobility ofbodies’ (Beer,2013,p.162).Digitaltechnologies, from
this perspective, open up the body to data flows and the dynamic experience of
interfacing with information. Such interfacing is itself now constitutive of much
human experience, as bodies have become increasingly overlaid with data and
information:
Gradually we areadding a new skinof data to theworld, a skinwhich can also have
its own life…. What we are seeing is data gradually becoming a part of how we see
the world as it becomes embedded in all of the surfaces we come across, and the
moving actors that span them, whether birds and trees or cars or us. (Thrift, 2014,
p. 1264)
Intricately webbed into data flows through mobile devices and wearable sensors, the
body moves in ‘coded spaces’ where the flow of data through the environment can
shape physical movement and activity (Kitchin & Dodge, 2011). It is clear that
metaphorical accounts of personal data as bodily surfaces and ‘artificial skins’ linked
to wider networked systems resonates with images of the quantified self as node in a
mosaic of connections, mathematical models and proceduralized actions. In this

Algorithmic skin 147
sense, health-tracking data act as a kind of active and algorithmic layer of skin that
does not only sheathe but animates and orders the body.
For eHPE, such developments raise the possibility that devices such as Polar
Active, Sqord, Zamzee and the rest will increasingly interlace children with algori?
thmic models that have the power to shape the ways in which they think about and
activate their own physical capacities. In post-humanist media theory, it has been
recognized that the nature of consciousness and subjectivity changes over time as
media technologies change—that subjects conceive of themselves and act in relation
to the technical environment (Hall, 2013). In the contemporary social media envi?
ronment, within which emerging health-tracking technologies for physical education
must be situated, subjects are increasingly being coordinated by pre-programmed
patterns of information that are based on the algorithmic tracking and analysis of
their personal data. There is symmetry here with recent theoretical and empirical
work in biopolitics, which has shown how the body in recent discourses has been
reconceived as a kind of programmable software that can be controlled through
sequencing the right kind of codes—whether genetic or computational (Lemke,
2011). The body and even thebrain are increasingly viewed as malleable, plastic and
improvable (Rose & Abi-Rached, 2013). As data captured from the body are
processed by health-tracking algorithms, specific health problems can be identified
and new personalized goals set. This process repositions the student’s growing body
and subjectivity as the co-constructed product of biology and algorithms—a
biological body that is increasingly augmented and expanded through its intercon-
nection with vast coded and networked systems of sensing, monitoring, tracking and
control, and with their underlying algorithmic systems of analysis, anticipation and
prediction. The pedagogies of health-tracking produce a student growing up in a
body with algorithmic skin.
Conclusion
ThisarticlehasaimedtocontributetothediscussioninthisnewResearchForumon
thelikely‘digitalfuture’ofhealthandphysicaleducation.Tothatendithasexplored
the idea that health-tracking and personal analytics technologies designed and
promoted for use in eHPE are an emerging form of biopedagogy concerned with
the algorithmic governance of the body. These biopedagogies are part of the culture
of self-optimization and self-knowledge through numbers—a solutionist obsession
with ‘tuning’ and ‘perfecting’ the body with the right algorithms—that pervades the
calculated public of the self-quantification movement. Undergirding self-quantification
is a particular set of socially produced classification of healthiness that are now
encoded and modelled in the algorithmic systems that track, measure and metricize
physicalexertionandotherbodilyandpsychologicalactivities.Thesemodelsarepart
of a broader issue of how the ‘world out there’ can be translated ‘into a world in
here, in the algorithmic machine’ (Neyland, 2014, p. 11), a process that involves
translating the body of the student into quantifiable data and fitting them to pre-
existing classifications. Students are to be governed through particular classifications

148 B. Williamson
and modelsof the body that canbe capturedand tracked as calculabledata bysocio-
algorithmic procedures.
The logic of such self-quantification technologies in eHPE is that if the student’s
body can be counted and calculated, it can also then become amenable to being
governed and controlled. The child’s body in this discourse has been redefined as a
kind of software that has been made amenable to being acted upon, enhanced and
optimized, as instructed by codes and algorithms. This is a process not only of real-
time data collection and analysis, but also of future-tense prediction. These activities
are part of an increasing concern with imagining the future in contemporary
biopolitics, a concern at least partly interwoven with the technical capacity of
computational statistics, machine learning algorithms and predictive analytics to
construct probabilistic predictions of individuals’ future actions and behaviours.
Such technologies of anticipation have the potential to exert material and corporeal
effects on the health of children. Metaphorically speaking, the biological and
corporeal figure of the quantified child is wrapped in algorithmic skin, an artificial
informational membrane that continually interacts with, and is activated by, a
densely coded informational environment. Self-quantification practices are con-
nected to a vast networked cognitive system that increasingly has an active power to
shape the body that moves through it. This raises serious concerns about the extent
to which students’ physical development may be hybridized with flows of media and
data, and the role of data gadgets in formatting individual and social health. Built
into the algorithmic models of self-tracking eHPE hardware and software is a
particularclassification andorderingofthesociallydesirable childthatconformstoa
messymixofcommercial,governmentalandmedicalaspirationsregardingthemoral
ordering of society as a whole.
Thesedevelopmentsmakeitimportantforresearcherstointerrogatetheroleofthe
algorithms that are increasingly interwoven with the classification, control and
governance of health and physical education. The algorithms that enable health and
physical activity tracking devices and apps to function privilege automaticity,
quantification, proceduralization and automation in humanhealth. These algorithms
enact a range of assumptions and models of healthiness and social norms of how
students should conduct their lives and improve their bodies. Such technologies can
be seen as extensions of the complex of medical, psychological and neurological
technologies through which governments and businesses seek to understand popu?
lations in order to better manage them, or market to them. As such, algorithmic
health-tracking processes are also interlaced with public health agendas and
governmental and medical strategies which put the emphasis both on digitized forms
of health data collection and on individuals using such data to take care of their own
health—‘people-poweredhealth’mediatedbyemergingtechnologiesasNesta(2014)
imagines it. As more and more health-tracking devices and apps designed for use in
educational institutions become available, the governance of physical education
pedagogies is likely to become more and more subject to commercially produced
health-tracking systems and their built-in algorithmic models and assumptions about
children’s health and physical activity.

Algorithmic skin 149
Moreover, the digitized future of health and physical education is likely to mirror
the wider development of data-driven schools in which data tracking, sensing and
analysis, facilitated by software and data analytics algorithms, will increasingly in?
fluence and shape administration, curriculum, pedagogy and assessment. Such
‘smartschools’willmobilizetheconstantcollectionandconnectionofdataasaform
of artificial sentience, making every aspect of school performance into a real-time
process of data collection, analysis and feedback. Such technologies will ramify and
solidify existing regimes of performance management, whilst also serving to
accelerate the use of data for predictive purposes. As data analytics technologies
suchaseducational datamining and learninganalytics becomeincreasingly powerful
through the use of machine learning algorithms that can be used to build predictive
models, these sentient and smart schools will become able not only to provide real-
time data on student progress, but also to make ‘future-tense’ predictions of their
likely outcomes and to prescribe automated interventions that might pre-empt them.
Asmachinelearningalgorithmsandpredictiveanalyticsfromthewiderdata-tracking
ecosystem leak into schools, it is likely that the future pedagogies of eHPE will be
based on new forms of anticipatory knowledge and predictive forecasts of students’
future healthiness that will make it possible and perhaps pedagogically desirable to
intervene to pre-empt their future lives.
Funding
This article is based on research funded by the Economic and Social Research Council [grant
number ES/L001160/1] and the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
References
Amoore, L. (2009). Algorithmic war: Everyday geographies of the war on terror. Antipode, 41(1),
49–69. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8330.2008.00655.x
Ball, S. J., & Junemann, C. (2012). Networks, new governance and education. Bristol: Policy Press.
Beer, D. (2009). Power through the algorithm? Participatory web cultures and the technological
unconscious. New Media and Society, 11, 985–1002. doi:10.1177/1461444809336551
Beer, D. (2013). Popular culture and new media: The politics of circulation. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Bernstein, B. (2000). Pedagogy, symbolic control and identity (Rev. ed.). Oxford: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Boessel, W. E. (2013, September 26). Return of the Quantrepreneurs. The Society Pages:
Cyborgology. Retrieved from http://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/2013/09/26/return-of-
the-quantrepreneurs/#more-17136
Bowker, G. C., & Star, S. L. (1999). Sorting things out: Classification and its consequences. London:
MIT Press.
Bucher, T. (2012). Want to be on the top? Algorithmic power and the threat of invisibility on
Facebook. New Media & Society, 14, 1164–1180. doi:10.1177/1461444812440159
Cheney-Lippold, J. (2011). A new algorithmic identity: Soft biopolitics and the modulation of
control. Theory, Culture & Society, 28, 164–181. doi:10.1177/0263276411424420

150 B. Williamson
Evans, J., & Davies, B. (2014). Physical education PLC: Neoliberalism, curriculum and
governance. New directions for PESP research. Sport, Education and Society, 19, 869–884.
doi:10.1080/13573322.2013.850072
Evans, J., & Rich, E. (2011). Body policies and body pedagogies: Every child matters in totally
pedagogised schools? Journal of Education Policy, 26, 361–379.
Gard, M. (2014). eHPE: A history of the future. Sport, Education and Society, 19, 827–845.
doi:10.1080/13573322.2014.938036
Gillespie, T. (2014a). The relevance of algorithms. In T. Gillespie, P. J. Boczkowski, & K. A. Foot
(Eds.), Media technologies: Essays on communication, materiality and society. 167–194. London:
MIT Press.
Gillespie, T. (2014b, June 25). Algorithm. Culture Digitally. Retrieved from http://culturedigitally.
org/2014/06/algorithm-draft-digitalkeyword/
Hall, G. (2013). #Mysubjectivation. New Formations, 79(1), 83–103. doi:10.3898/NEWF.79.
05.2013
Hayles, N. K. (1999). How we became posthuman: Virtual bodies in cybernetics, literature and
informatics. London: University of Chicago Press.
Hswen, Y., Murti, V., Vormawor, A. A., Bhattacharjee, R., & Naslund, J. A. (2013). Virtual
avatars, gaming, and social media: Designing a mobile health app to help children choose
healthier food options. Journal of Mobile Technologies in Medicine, 2,8–14. doi:10.7309/
jmtm.2.4S.6
Kitchin, R., & Dodge, M. (2011). Code/space: Software and everyday life. London: MIT Press.
Lash, S. (2007). Power after hegemony: Cultural studies in mutation? Theory, Culture & Society,
24(3), 55–78. doi:10.1177/0263276407075956
Lemke, T. (2011). Biopolitics: An advanced introduction. New York: New York University Press.
Lupton, D. (2013). Understanding the human machine. IEEE Technology and Society Magazine,
32(4), 25–30. doi:10.1109/MTS.2013.2286431
Lupton, D. (2014, August 27). Self-tracking modes: Reflexive self-monitoring and data practices.
Paper presented at the ‘Imminent Citizenships: Personhood and Identity Politics in the
Informatic Age’ workshop, ANU, Canberra.
MacCormick, J. (2012). Nine algorithms that changed the future: The ingenious ideas that drive today’s
computers. Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Macdonald, D. (2014). Is global neo-liberalism shaping the future of physical education? Physical
Education and Sport Pedagogy, 19, 494–499. doi:10.1080/17408989.2014.920496
Mackenzie, A. (2006). Cutting code: Software and sociality. Oxford: Peter Lang.
Mackenzie, A. (2013). Programming subjects in the regime of anticipation: Software studies and
subjectivity. Subjectivity, 6, 391–405. doi:10.1057/sub.2013.12
Mager, A. (2012). Algorithmic ideology: How capitalist society shapes search engines. Information,
Communication & Society, 15(5), 769–787.
Mayer-Schönberger, V., & Cukier, K. (2014). Learning from big data: The future of education. New
York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Nafus, D., & Sherman, J. (2014). This one does not go up to 11: The quantified self movement as
an alternative big data practice. International Journal of Communication, 8, 1784–1794.
Nesta. (2014). Six futures for health data. Retrieved from http://www.nesta.org.uk/six-futures-
health-data
Neyland, D. (2014). On organizing algorithms. Theory, Culture & Society. doi:10.1177/
0263276414530477
Pykett, J. (2012). The pedagogic state: Education, citizenship, governing. In J. Pykett (Ed.),
Governing through pedagogy: Re-educating citizens (pp. 1–20). London: Routledge.

Algorithmic skin 151
Raley, R. (2013). Dataveillance and counterveillance. In L. Gitelman (Ed.), ‘Raw data’ is an
oxymoron (pp. 121–146). London: MIT Press.
Rich, E., & Miah, A. (2014). Understanding digital health as public pedagogy: A critical
framework. Societies, 4, 296–315. doi:10.3390/soc4020296
Rose, N. (1999). Governing the soul: The shaping of the private self. London: Free Association.
Rose, N., & Abi-Rached, J. (2013). Neuro: The new brain sciences and the management of the mind.
Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Ruckenstein, M. (2014). Visualized and interacted life: personal analytics and engagements with
data doubles. Societies, 4(1), 68–84. doi:10.3390/soc4010068
Schaefer, C. E., Van Loan, German, (2014). A feasibility study of wearable activity monitors for
pre-adolescent school-age children. Preventing Chronic Disease, 11(130262).
Selwyn, N. (2014). Data entry: Towards the critical study of digital data and education. Learning,
Media & Technology. doi:10.1080/17439884.2014.921628
Sqord. (2014). About Sqord. Retrieved from http://sqord.com/
Swan, M. (2012). Sensor mania! The internet of things, wearable computing, objective metrics,
and the quantified self 2.0. Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, 1, 217–253. Retrieved
from http://www.mdpi.com/2224-2708/1/3/217/pdf
Thrift, N. (2014). The promise of urban informatics: Some speculations. Environment & Planning
A, 46, 1263–1266. doi:10.1068/a472c.
Vander Schee, C. (2009). Fruit, vegetables, fatness, and Foucault: Governing students and their
families through school health policy. Journal of Education Policy, 24, 557–574. doi:10.1080/
02680930902823047
Whitson, J. R. (2013). Gaming the quantified self. Surveillance & Society, 11, 163–176.
Williams, B. J., Hay, P. J., & Macdonald, D. (2011). The outsourcing of health, sport and physical
educational work: A state of play. Physical Education & Sport Pedagogy, 16, 399–415.
doi:10.1080/17408989.2011.582492
Williamson, B. (2014a). Governing software: networks, databases and algorithmic power in the
digitalgovernanceofeducation. Learning,Media&Technology.doi:10.1080/17439884.2014.
924527
Williamson,B.(2014b).Knowingpublicservices:Cross-sectorintermediariesandalgorithmic
governance in public sector reform. Public Policy & Administration, 29(4), 292–312.
doi:10.1177/0952076714529139
Williamson, E. (2014, June 6). Baby tech: Will new gadgets result in paranoid parents? BBC News.
Retrieved from http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-27669210
Wolf, G. (2010, April 28). The data-driven life. New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.
nytimes.com/2010/05/02/magazine/02self-measurement-t.html

