17.5 Communication Protocols 757
1. Layer 1: Physical layer. The physical layer is responsible for handling
both the mechanical and the electrical details of the physical transmission
of a bit stream. At the physical layer, the communicating systems must
agree on the electrical representation of a binary 0 and 1, so that when data
are sent as a stream of electrical signals, the receiver is able to interpret the
data properly as binary data. This layer is implemented in the hardware
of the networking device. It is responsible for delivering bits.
2. Layer 2: Data-link layer. The data-link layer is responsible for handling
frames, or ?xed-length parts of packets, including any error detection
and recovery that occurs in the physical layer. It sends frames between
physical addresses.
3. Layer 3: Network layer. The network layer is responsible for breaking
messages into packets, providing connections between logical addresses,
and routing packets in the communication network, including handling
the addresses of outgoing packets, decoding the addresses of incoming
packets, and maintaining routing information for proper response to
changing load levels. Routers work at this layer.
4. Layer 4: Transport layer. The transport layer is responsible for transfer of
messages between nodes, including partitioning messages into packets,
maintaining packet order, and controlling ?ow to avoid congestion.
5. Layer 5: Session layer. The session layer is responsible for implementing
sessions, or process-to-process communication protocols.
6. Layer 6: Presentation layer. The presentation layer is responsible for
resolving the differences in formats among the various sites in the
network, including character conversions and half duplex–full duplex
modes (character echoing).
7. Layer 7: Application layer. The application layer is responsible for inter-
acting directly with users. This layer deals with ?le transfer, remote-login
protocols, and electronic mail, as well as with schemas for distributed
databases.
Figure 17.6 summarizes the OSI protocol stack—a set of cooperating
protocols—showing the physical ?ow of data. As mentioned, logically each
layer of a protocol stack communicates with the equivalent layer on other
systems. But physically, a message starts at or above the application layer and
is passed through each lower level in turn. Each layer may modify the message
and include message-header data for the equivalent layer on the receiving
side. Ultimately, the message reaches the data-network layer and is transferred
as one or more packets (Figure 17.7). The data-link layer of the target system
receives these data, and the message is moved up through the protocol stack.
It is analyzed, modi?ed, and stripped of headers as it progresses. It ?nally
reaches the application layer for use by the receiving process.
The OSI model formalizes some of the earlier work done in network
protocols but was developed in the late 1970s and is currently not in widespread
use. Perhaps the most widely adopted protocol stack is the TCP/IP model, which
has been adopted by virtually all Internet sites. The TCP/IP protocol stack has
fewer layers than the OSI model. Theoretically, because it combines several
