C.2 Probability 1191
In our coin-?ipping example, suppose that each of the four elementary events
has probability 1=4. Then the probability of getting at least one head is
PrfHH; HT; THg D PrfHHgC PrfHTgC PrfTHg
D 3=4 :
Alternatively, since the probability of getting strictly less than one head is
PrfTTgD 1=4, the probability of getting at least one head is 1null1=4D 3=4.
Discreteprobabilitydistributions
A probability distribution isdiscrete if it is de?ned over a ?nite or countably in?nite
sample space. Let S be the sample space. Then for any event A,
X
PrfAgD Prfsg ;
s2A
since elementary events, speci?cally those in A, are mutually exclusive. If S is
?nite and every elementary event s2 S has probability
PrfsgD 1=jSj ;
then we have theuniformprobabilitydistribution on S. In such a case the experi-
ment is often described as “picking an element of S at random.”
As an example, consider the process of ?ipping afair coin, one for which the
probability of obtaining a head is the same as the probability of obtaining a tail, that
is, 1=2. If we ?ip the coin n times, we have the uniform probability distribution
n
n
de?ned on the sample space SDfH; Tg , a set of size 2 . We can represent each
elementary event in S as a string of length n overfH; Tg, each string occurring with
n
probability 1=2 .Theevent
ADfexactly k heads and exactly nnullk tails occurg
nullnull nullnull
n n
is a subset of S of size A D ,since strings of length n over H; T contain
j j f g
k k
nullnull
n
n
exactly k H’s. The probability of event A is thus PrfAgD =2 .
k
Continuousuniformprobabilitydistribution
The continuous uniform probability distribution is an example of a probability
distribution in which not all subsets of the sample space are considered to be
events. The continuous uniform probability distribution is de?ned over a closed
interval Œa; bnull of the reals, wherea<b . Our intuition is that each point in the in-
terval Œa; bnull should be “equally likely.” There are an uncountable number of points,
however, so if we give all points the same ?nite, positive probability, we cannot si-
multaneously satisfy axioms 2 and 3. For this reason, we would like to associate a
