22 Chapter 2 Getting Started
a pointer to the array is passed, rather than the entire array, and changes to
individual array elements are visible to the calling procedure.
A return statement immediately transfers control back to the point of call in
the calling procedure. Mostreturn statements also take a value to pass back to
the caller. Our pseudocode differs from many programming languages in that
we allow multiple values to be returned in a singlereturn statement.
The boolean operators “and” and “or” areshortcircuiting. That is, when we
evaluate the expression “x and y”we?rstevaluatex.Ifx evaluates to FALSE,
then the entire expression cannot evaluate to TRUE, and so we do not evaluate y.
If, on the other hand, x evaluates to TRUE,wemustevaluatey to determine the
value of the entire expression. Similarly, in the expression “x or y”weeval-
uate the expression y only if x evaluates to FALSE. Short-circuiting operators
allow us to write boolean expressions such as “x¤ NIL and x:fD y” without
worrying about what happens when we try to evaluate x:f when x is NIL.
The keyword error indicates that an error occurred because conditions were
wrong for the procedure to have been called. The calling procedure is respon-
sible for handling the error, and so we do not specify what action to take.
Exercises
2.1-1
Using Figure 2.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of INSERTION-SORT on the
array ADh31; 41; 59; 26; 41; 58i.
2.1-2
Rewrite the INSERTION-SORT procedure to sort into nonincreasing instead of non-
decreasing order.
2.1-3
Consider thesearchingproblem:
Input: A sequence of n numbers ADh a ;a ;:::;ai and a value null .
1 2 n
Output: An index i such that nullD AŒinull or the special value NIL if null does not
appear in A.
Write pseudocode for linear search, which scans through the sequence, looking
for null . Using a loop invariant, prove that your algorithm is correct. Make sure that
your loop invariant ful?lls the three necessary properties.
2.1-4
Consider the problem of adding two n-bit binary integers, stored in two n-element
arrays A and B. The sum of the two integers should be stored in binary form in
nullnullnull
