692 Chapter 17. Making Complex Decisions 
17.19 A Dutch auction is similar in an English auction, but rather than starting the bidding 
at a low pricc and increasing, in a Dutch auction the seller starts at a high price and gradually 
lowers the price until some buyer is willing to accept that price. (If multiple bidders accept 
the price, one is arbitrarily chosen as the winner.) More formally, the seller begins with a 
price p and gradually lowers p by increments of d until at least one buyer accepts the price. 
Assuming all bidders act rationally, is it true that for arbitrarily small d, a Dutch auction will 
always result in the bidder with the highest value for the item obtaining the item? If so, show 
mathematically why. If not, explain how it may be possible for the bidder with highest value 
for the item not to obtain it. 
17.20 Imagine an auction mechanism that is just like an ascending-bid auction, except that 
at the end, the winning bidder, the one who bid  pays only h /2 rather than b „   
rna
mar 
borax, 
Assuming all agents are rational, what is the expected revenue to the auctioneer for this 
mechanism, compared with a standard ascending-bid auction? 
17.21 Teams in the National Hockey League historically received 2 points for winning a 
game and 0 for losing. If the game is tied, an overtime period is played; if nobody wins in 
overtime. the game is a tie and each team gets 1 point. But league officials felt that teams 
were playing too conservatively in overtime (to avoid a loss), and it would be more exciting 
if overtime produced a winner. So in 1999 the officials experimented in mechanism design: 
the rules were changed, giving a team that loses in overtime 1 point, not 0. It is still 2 points 
for a win and I for a tie. 
a. Was hockey a zero-sum  game before the rule change? After? 
b. Suppose that at a certain time t.  in a game, the home team has probability p of winning 
in regulation time, probability 0.78 — p of losing, and probability 0.22 of going into 
overtime, where they have probability q of winning, _9 —  q of losing, and .1 of tying 
Give equations for the expected value for the home and visiting teams. 
c. Imagine that it were legal and ethical for the two teams to enter into a pact where they 
agree that they will skate to a tie in regulation time, and then both try in earnest to win 
in overtime. Under what conditions, in terms of p and q, would it be rational for both 
teams to agree to this pact? 
d. Longley and Sankaran (2005) report that since the rule change, the percentage of games 
with a winner in overtime went up 18.2%,  as desired, but the percentage of overtime 
games also went up 16%. What does that suggest about possible collusion or conser-
vative play after the rule change? 
