Exercises 801 
EXERCISES 
19.1 Show, by translating into conjunctive normal form and applying resolution, that the 
conclusion drawn on page 784 concerning Brazilians is sound. 
19i  For each of the following determinations, write down the logical representation and 
explain why the determination is true (if it is): 
a. Design and denomination determine the mass of a coin. 
h. For a given program, input determines  output. 
c. Climate, food intake, exercise, and metabolism determine weight gain and loss. 
d. Baldness is determined by the baldness (or lack thereof) of one's maternal grandfather. 
193 Would a probabilistic version of determinations be useful? Suggest a definition. 
19.4 Fill in the missing values for the clauses C or C2 (or both) in the following sets of 
l 
clauses, given that C is the resolvent of Cl 
 and C2: 
7
a. C = Trite = P(A,   B), Ct = P(2, 
y) y), C2 = ?. 
b. C = True P(A, B), Ct =??, C2 =??.   
c. C = P (x y) = P(T,   f ( 0), C1 =??,   C2 =7?. 
If there is more than one possible solution, provide one example of each different kind_ 
19.5 Suppose one writes a logic program that carries out a resolution inference step. That 
is, let Resolve(e ,  c) succeed if r is the result of resolving e and 0 . Normally, Resolve 
i l 2
would be used as part of a theorem prover by calling it with e and c instantiated to par-
l 2 
ticular clauses, thereby generating the resolvent c. Now suppose instead that we call it with 
e  instantiated and o and 0 uninstantiated.  Will this succeed in generating the appropriate 
f 2 
results of an inverse resolution step? Would you need any special modifications to the logic 
programming system for this to work? 
19.6 Suppose that FOIL is considering adding a literal to a clause using a binary predicate 
P and that previous literals (including the head of the clause) contain five different variables. 
a_ How many fiinctionally  different literals can be generated? Two literals are functionally 
identical if they differ only in the names of the new variables that they contain. 
b. Can you find a general formula for the number of different literals with a predicate of 
arity  r when there are rt  variables previously used? 
c. Why does FOIL not allow literals that contain no previously used variables? 
19.7 Using the data from the family tree in Figure 19.11, or a subset thereof, apply the FOIL 
algorithm to learn a definition for the Ancestor predicate. 
