Section 14.1. Representing Knowledge in an Uncertain Domain 511 
A Bayesian network is a directed graph in which each node is annotated with quantita-
tive probability information. The full specification is as follows: 
Each node corresponds to a random variable, which may be discrete or continuous. 
2. A set of directed links or arrows connects pairs of nodes. If there is an arrow from node 
X to node Y, X is said to be a parent of Y. The graph has no directed cycles (and hence 
is a directed acyclic graph, or DAG. 
3. Each node Xi has a conditional probability distribution P(X Parents(Xj))   that quan-
L 
tifies the effect of the parents on the node. 
The topology of the network—the set of nodes and links—specifies the conditional indepen-
dence relationships that hold in the domain, in a way that will be made precise shortly. The 
intuitive meaning of an arrow is typically that X has a direct influence on Y, which suggests 
that causes should be parents of effects. It is usually easy for a domain expert to decide what 
direct influences exist in the domain—much easier, in fact, than actually specifying the prob-
abilities themselves. Once the topology of the Bayesian network is laid out, we need only 
specify a conditional probability distribution for each variable, given its parents. We will 
see that the combination of the topology and the conditional distributions suffices to specify 
(implicitly) the full joint distribution for all the variables_ 
Recall the simple world described in Chapter 13, consisting of the variables Toothache, 
Cavity, Catch, and Weather. We argued that Weather is independent of the other vari-
ables; furthermore, we argued that Toothache and Catch are conditionally independent, 
given Cavity. These relationships are represented by the Bayesian network structure shown 
in Figure 14.1. Formally, the conditional independence of Toothache and Catch„ given 
Cavity, is indicated by the absence of a link between Toothache and Catch. Intuitively, the 
network represents the fact that Cavity is a direct cause of Toothache and Catch, whereas 
no direct causal relationship exists between Toothache and Catch. 
Now consider the following example, which is just a little more complex. You have 
a new burglar alarm installed at home. it is fairly reliable at detecting a burglary, but also 
responds on occasion to minor earthquakes. (This example is due to Judea Pearl, a resident 
of Los Angeles—hence the acute interest in earthquakes.) You also have two neighbors, John 
and Mary, who have promised to call you at work when they hear the alarm.  John nearly 
always calls when he hears the alarm, but sometimes confuses the telephone ringing with 
Figure 14.1  A simple Bayesian network in which Weather is independent of the other 
three variables and Toothache  and Catch, are conditionally independent, given Cavity. 
