BEYOND CLASSICAL 
SEARCH 
In which we relax the simplifying assumptions of the previous chapter;   thereby 
getting closer to the real world. 
Chapter 3 addressed a single category of problems: observable, deterministic, known envi-
ronments where the solution is a sequence of actions. In this chapter, we look at what happens 
when these assumptions are relaxed. We begin with a fairly simple case: Sections 4.1 and 4.2 
cover algorithms that perform purely local search in the state space, evaluating and modify-
ing one or more current states rather than systematically exploring paths from an initial state. 
These algorithms are suitable for problems in which all that matters is the solution state, not 
the path cost to reach it. The family of local search algorithms includes methods inspired by 
statistical physics (simulated annealing) and evolutionary biology (genetic algorithms). 
Then, in Sections 4.3-4.4, we examine what happens when we relax the assumptions 
of determinism and observability. The key idea is that if an agent cannot predict exactly whit 
percept it will receive, then it will need to consider what to do under each contingency that 
its percepts may reveal. With partial observability, the agent will also need to keep track of 
the states it might be in. 
Finally, Section 4.5 investigates online search, in which the agent is faced with a state 
space that is initially unknown and must be explored. 
4.1 LOCAL SEARCH ALGORITHMS AND OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS 
The search algorithms that we have seen so far are designed to explore search spaces sys-
tematically. This systematicity is achieved by keeping one or more paths in memory and by 
recording which alternatives have been explored at each paint along the path. When a goal is 
found, the path to that goal also constitutes a solution to the problem. In many problems, how-
ever, the path to the goal is irrelevant. For example, in the 8-queens problem (see page 71). 
what matters is the final configuration of queens, not the order in which they are added. The 
same general property holds for many important applications such as integrated-circuit de-
sign, factory-flour  layout, job-shop scheduling, automatic programming, telecommunications 
network optimization, vehicle routing. and portfolio management. 
120 
