460 Chapter 9 Virtual Memory
Test File
We provide the ?leaddresses.txt, which contains integer values represent-
ing logical addresses ranging from 0 ? 65535 (the size of the virtual address
space). Your program will open this ?le, read each logical address and translate
it to its corresponding physical address, and output the value of the signed byte
at the physical address.
How to Begin
First, write a simple program that extracts the page number and offset (based
on Figure 9.33) from the following integer numbers:
1, 256, 32768, 32769, 128, 65534, 33153
Perhaps the easiest way to do this is by using the operators for bit-masking
and bit-shifting. Once you can correctly establish the page number and offset
from an integer number, you are ready to begin.
Initially, we suggest that you bypass the TLB and use only a page table. You
can integrate the TLB once your page table is working properly. Remember,
address translation can work without a TLB;theTLB just makes it faster. When
you are ready to implement the TLB, recall that it has only 16 entries, so you
will need to use a replacement strategy when you update a full TLB.Youmay
use either a FIFO or an LRU policy for updating your TLB.
How to Run Your Program
Your program should run as follows:
./a.out addresses.txt
Your program will read in the ?leaddresses.txt, which contains 1,000 logical
addresses ranging from 0 to 65535. Your program is to translate each logical
address to a physical address and determine the contents of the signed byte
stored at the correct physical address. (Recall that in the C language, thechar
data type occupies a byte of storage, so we suggest usingchar values.)
Your program is to output the following values:
1. The logical address being translated (the integer value being read from
addresses.txt).
2. The corresponding physical address (what your program translates the
logical address to).
3. The signed byte value stored at the translated physical address.
We also provide the ?le correct.txt, which contains the correct output
values for the ?leaddresses.txt. You should use this ?le to determine if your
program is correctly translating logical to physical addresses.
Statistics
After completion, your program is to report the following statistics:
